[Page #0]
National standards for essential digital skills
April 2019
[Page #1]
Contents
Introduction
3
Foundation skills
3
Guidance
3
Using the standards
4
National standards for essential digital skills
5
1. Using devices and handling information
5
2. Creating and editing
11
3. Communicating
14
4. Transacting
17
5. Being safe and responsible online
20
Glossary
25
2
[Page #2]
Introduction
The standards set out the digital skills needed for work and life across two skills levels:
• Entry – designed for adults with no or little prior experience of using digital devices
or the internet.
• Level 1 – designed for adults with some experience of using digital devices and the
internet but lacking secure basic digital skills.
The standards include a single entry level, rather than three entry sub-levels to reflect how digital skills are typically taught, learned and applied. The entry level skills statements include skills across the three entry sub-levels.
Foundation skills
Some adults may need support to handle and use digital devices for the first time and to learn the following foundation skills before enrolling on an entry level course:
• Turning on a device (including entering and updating any account information safely,
such as a password);
• Using the available controls on a device (such as a mouse and keyboard for a
computer, or touchscreen on a smartphone or tablet);
• Making use of accessibility tools (including assistive technology) to make devices easier to use (such as changing display settings to make content easier to read);
•
Interacting with the home screen on a device;
• Connecting to the internet (including Wi-Fi) safely and securely, and opening a
browser;
• Opening and accessing an application on a device.
These foundation skills are at pre-entry level and therefore, while not part of the standards themselves, will be an important prerequisite for some individuals. They may be included in specifications for essential digital skills qualifications, but must not be subject to assessment.
Guidance
The skill statements which make up the standards represent a distinct, independent skill and aim to be coherent both across the two levels (progression within a skill) and down the columns (skills statements within each level align across the skill areas).
3
[Page #3]
Skills statements have been expressed in terms designed to avoid creating unnecessary barriers to individuals with a learning difficulty or a disability and to support use of assistive technology.
The amplification provides more detail on how individual skill statements should be interpreted – clarifying what is and is not in scope for the specified skill at that level. Providing amplification means that the skill statements themselves can remain concise and easily comprehended, and any detail required on the range or depth of coverage intended by the skill statement, and the knowledge and understanding required, can reside in the amplification.
Amplification is only provided where it is required to support interpretation of the skill statements. Where the skill statements themselves are deemed self-explanatory, no amplification is provided.
The knowledge and understanding notes provided for each skill are not intended to be exhaustive, but rather to reinforce the intention that individuals should understand the basic concepts which underpin the skills to be able to develop their own use of technology subsequently.
The glossary is provided to support consistent interpretation of common terms across the standards.
Using the standards
The standards are primarily intended for use by awarding organisations in developing new essential digital skills qualifications, available for first teaching from August 2020.
Essential digital skills qualifications must cover all five skills areas set out in these national standards (using devices and handling information, creating and editing, communicating, transactions and being safe and responsible online), and may cover some, or all, of the skills statements in each skill area. The specific skills statements covered by an essential digital skills qualification will depend on its purpose.
The standards will also inform the development of new subject content for digital Functional Skills qualifications, available for first teaching from 2021.
4
[Page #4]
National standards for essential digital skills
1. Using devices and handling information
1.1 Skills statements
Entry level
Level 1
Using devices
1
Know what is meant by hardware, software, operating systems and applications; locate and install an application; apply system settings, including those for accessibility.
Keep operating system and applications up to date.
Finding and evaluating information
2
Navigate online content using hyperlinks, menus and other navigation elements to locate required information; carry out searches to find information and content.
Use appropriate techniques to carry out and refine searches, taking into account currency, relevance, and reliability, and be aware that results are ranked by search engines.
Managing and storing information
3
Open, read and save information from/to a file using appropriate naming conventions; work with files and folders to store, organise and retrieve information using local and remote storage.
Organise and store information using files, folders, hierarchy and tagging to enable efficient information retrieval on a device and across devices.
Identifying and solving technical problems
4
Recognise when a technical problem has been encountered, solve simple technical problems, and seek assistance when unable to solve a technical problem.
Identify and apply solutions to common technical problems, using online tutorials, FAQs and help facilities.
Developing digital skills
5
Identify and use appropriate online learning resources to maintain and improve digital skills.
5
[Page #5]
1.2 Amplification
 Skill Statement Entry level
 Level 1
 Glossary terms
Devices will include computers (desktop/laptop) and mobile devices, smart devices, and wearable technology.
Operating systems (OS) include those typically used for computers (desktop/laptop) and mobile devices.
 Using devices
 accessibility, operating system
Applications include applications for computers, (desktop/laptop) and mobile devices.
Hardware means main physical elements that make up computers, (desktop/laptop) and mobile devices, smart devices, and wearable technology. It does not include an understanding of computer architecture.
Know how to check for OS and application updates, and to choose how and when an operating system or application is updated.
Software means the various kinds of programs providing functionality on devices.
Operating systems include those typically used for computers (desktop/laptop) and mobile devices.
Applications include applications for computers (desktop/laptop) and mobile devices.
System settings include display, sound, connecting to Wi-Fi, time, language settings and accessibility settings. Accessibility settings include use of a magnifier, the use of screen readers and use of voice controls.
Know main features and uses of devices. Know the role of operating systems and applications. Know that programs and data require storage, and that different devices have different storage capacities. Know how
6
[Page #6]
 Skill Statement Entry level
 Level 1
 Glossary terms
to find and install an application. Know how to select and adjust system settings.
Navigation elements include:
Searching refers to searching online for information or content and on a device for files or applications.
 Finding and evaluating information
 browser, search engine, content, search engine ranking, URL, reliable, currency, HTTPS
• menus • hyperlinks • browser navigation controls (back and
Searching online may include:
forward buttons, bookmarks).
• using quotation marks to look for specific
terms
Searching refers to searching online for a specific and clearly defined piece of information or content.
• using an image database or image search
service if searching for images
• applying filters relating to time or origin • searching within a specific website or social
 Know and understand terminology and
concepts relating to web pages:
media platform for information, images, music or video.
• websites • hyperlink navigation • URLs • search engines • keywords • web browsers • types of information, documents and
It may also include adopting an iterative approach of refining search terms to narrow or broaden searches as required. Searching online may be using a “traditional” search engine (text-based) or using a digital assistant (for example, through voice control).
media.
Searching on a device may include searching on:
• • partial file names •
file names
file content
Use appropriate techniques includes adopting an appropriate approach to searching based on the type of information sought.
7
[Page #7]
 Skill Statement Entry level
 Level 1
 Glossary terms
Methods of identifying the relevance and reliability of sources when searching online include:
• checking that a website uses HTTPS and has
a valid certificate
• being wary of poor-quality websites (low
quality design/graphics, broken links, poor English etc.)
• checking the date of the information provided • checking more than one source when
searching for information or consuming news online
• considering the source of the information and whether they might have a reason to provide biased or false information.
Have an awareness that the top online search results may include paid for or sponsored listings.
Across devices refers to storing files on cloud storage using one device and accessing the files using another device.
Know and understand terminology and concepts relating to:
information, file, remote storage, file naming convention, folder, hierarchy, tagging, device, credentials
 Managing and
storing information
• files and file types • file size • applications typically associated with file
Know and understand folder structures, file information including metadata and tagging, and accessing data across devices.
types • folders • digital storage (memory, hard drives) • local and remote storage.
Know and understand limitations on file sizes when using some services (e.g. email attachments, file size upload limits) and the benefits of using file compression to make
8
[Page #8]
 Skill Statement Entry level
 Level 1
 Glossary terms
effective use of storage capacity and to reduce data transfer times.
Understand and be able to use terminology describing data storage requirements: bytes, kilobyte (KB), megabyte (MB), gigabyte (GB), terabyte (TB).
Understand and be able to use terminology describing data transfer speeds: Megabits per second (Mbps).
Common technical problems refers to solving commonly encountered issues with a straightforward solution such as:
Recognise when a technical problem has been encountered includes recognising when there is a problem with a device or software and knowing that some problems are caused by user errors. User errors may include:
Identifying and solving technical problems
• resetting login credentials • changing Wi-Fi settings • following the instructions in an online tutorial to
• using incorrect credentials • incorrectly connecting hardware • attempting to open a file with an
change a software or app setting • disabling an app, or uninstalling and
reinstalling software.
unsuitable application
• attempting to save a file using a filename
Know and understand how to use help facilities, online forums and tutorials.
with inappropriate characters.
Solving simple problems refers to solving issues (such as system or application freeze, or internet connection issues) with a simple solution, such as an application re-start, device re-boot or network re-connection.
9
[Page #9]
 Skill Statement Entry level
 Level 1
 Glossary terms
Be aware of typical technical problems, e.g. on-screen error messages arising from application or peripheral hardware malfunctions, or online connectivity and communication issues.
None required
Online learning resources include FAQs, guides, videos, tutorials and advice forums.
 Developing digital skills
10
[Page #10]
2. Creating and editing
2.1 Skills statements
Entry level
Level 1
Creating and editing documents
6 Use a suitable application to enter, edit and format information (including text, numbers and graphics).
Use applications to enter, edit, format, layout information (including text, tables, graphics, charts) for a range of purposes and audiences.
Creating and editing digital media
7 Capture and save images, sound and video. Edit and enhance an image.
Processing numerical data
8
Enter, edit, sort, process, format, and chart numeric data.
11
[Page #11]
2.2 Amplification
 Skill
 Entry level
 Level 1
 Glossary terms
Statement
Editing text includes entering or amending, selecting, copying, cutting and pasting text.
Format tables/graphics/charts includes positioning, sizing, captioning, borders, flow of text.
 Creating and
 document, graphic, application, information, digital content
editing documents
Layout includes adopting appropriate common conventions for specific purposes and audiences e.g. a formal report for managers, an advertisement for consumers, a presentation for colleagues, etc.
Formatting text includes bold, underline, italics, font sizes and colours, text alignment, bulleted and numbered lists.
Formatting graphics includes positioning, sizing, borders.
Know and understand layout conventions and styles for different document purposes and audiences and be familiar with a range of formatting and layout features for different information including text, tables, images and charts.
Know and understand terminology and concepts relating to documents (including types e.g. word processed, presentations, etc.) and associated applications), with understanding of the purpose of different applications and typical uses of different document types.
“Capture and save” means using a device to grab an image, record video, or record sound, and storing the result on the device.
Edit and enhance includes altering the appearance of an image by adjusting the contrast or colour balance, adding a text caption to an image, cropping an image to keep only the section required, resizing etc. The application used may be a desktop application, or it may be an application on a touch-screen device.
 Creating and editing digital media
 digital media
Know and understand terminology relating to digital devices and digital media, including common file types such as JPEG, MPEG and WAV.
Know and understand terminology and concepts relating to image editing and enhancing.
12
[Page #12]
 Skill
 Entry level
 Level 1
 Glossary terms
Statement
None required
Format includes cell alignment, number formatting (e.g. number, currency, date, percentage), merging/splitting cells, etc.
 Processing numerical data
Process and chart includes using an application’s functionality to carry out simple calculations (such as totalling), filtering, using simple formulae and creating simple charts (e.g. with a single data series, no trend lines or data labels etc.).
Know and understand terminology and concepts relating to entering and editing information in a worksheet, formatting using row and column size adjustment, cell borders and data types (including formatting currency, percentages, and number of decimal places for numeric data).
Know how to sort data on one criterion, use simple filters, complete calculations using relative cell references and formulae with up to two mathematical operators, and replicate values and formulae.
Know how to create and format charts from data, including bar/column charts, pie charts and line graphs with suitable titles, axis category labels, data labels and legends.
13
[Page #13]
3. Communicating
3.1 Skills statements
Entry level
Level 1
Communicating and sharing
9 Create, edit and use contacts when sending
Identify and use appropriate modes of online communication for a range of contexts and audiences.
and receiving online communications comprising text and other digital content to individual and multiple recipients; initiate and participate in a video call.
Managing traceable online activities
10
Identify the types of digital activities that leave a ‘digital footprint’ and understand the implications.
Take steps to manage online identity.
14
[Page #14]
3.2 Amplification
 Skill Statement
 Entry level
 Level 1
 Glossary terms
Sending… digital content includes sharing access to online content.
Modes of online communication include email, instant message, text message, social media, blog, collaboration tools and services.
 Communicating and sharing
 contacts, online communication
Video call refers to a simple one-to-one communication via live video. It does not include a video conference involving groups of people, nor does it require scheduling meetings or inviting participants.
Contexts refers to the range of circumstances in which an online communication could be made e.g. at work, socially, in general public.
Audiences refers to different individuals or groups of people e.g. a colleague, a friend, a group of friends, users of a social media platform etc.
Know and understand terminology and concepts relating to emailing, texting and using other messaging apps, contacts and groups, and video calls.
Know and understand terminology and concepts relating to private and public communications (including the characteristics and benefits of each) and the actions which contribute to an individual’s digital footprint.
Managing online identity includes:
 Managing
 digital footprint,
traceable online activities
• using an appropriate online name and email
address
• understanding that online activities leave traces, and taking action such as being careful about the information shared and choosing appropriate location settings • searching for yourself online in order to understand what data you are sharing publicly
Know that a digital footprint is data left by online activity, including search history and websites/social media platforms visited, emails, uploaded photos and information sent to online services, blogs and social media activity.
• using a secondary email account to sign up
to sites
• unsubscribing from mailing lists • deleting unwanted social media accounts,
and old posts
15
[Page #15]
 Skill Statement
 Entry level
 Level 1
 Glossary terms
•
instigating right to be forgotten under data protection law.
Know and understand how an individual’s digital footprint can be managed.
This may include the use of privacy settings, managing the number of accounts in use, using secondary email accounts, avoiding oversharing information, using private browsing, and using digital security and privacy tools.
16
[Page #16]
4. Transacting
4.1 Skills statements
Entry level
Level 1
Using online services
11 Complete and submit a form as part of an
Interact with online transactional services and manage account settings.
online transaction, complying with verification checks.
Buying securely online
12 Buy an item/service online using a chosen
Compare online buying options for an item/service and identify best option.
method of online payment.
17
[Page #17]
4.2 Amplification
 Skill Statement Entry level
 Level 1
 Glossary terms
Online form typically comprises a simple single page form used to enter information (e.g. name and/or contact details) to register for, or to request a service e.g. make an appointment, or collection of household rubbish.
Online transactional services include online shopping, finance (e.g. online banking), utilities (e.g. gas, electricity, water), government services (paying council tax online, booking a doctor’s appointment, applying for benefits) media (e.g. streaming services) etc.
 Using online services
 verification check,
transactional online service, authentication
Interact will include uploading/downloading of documents and images as required.
Know and understand terminology and concepts relating to online forms and data validation, verification checks, entering data (including numerical data, for example in an online form or calculator).
Manage includes setting account preferences.
Understand that file sizes, e.g. for images can involve large amounts of data and the file size may need to be reduced before sending.
Online payment methods may include: credit/debit cards; third party online and/or mobile payment services; third party online and/or mobile digital wallet services etc.
Compare online buying options for an item/service includes comparing different product options, prices, delivery options etc. across multiple providers or retailers and selecting the best option in terms of fitness for purpose, price and delivery. It also includes being aware of possible scam sites.
 Buying
securely online
Know how to establish and compare price and delivery options for products and services. Know how to identify scam sites. Methods for identifying scam sites could include:
• checking for the padlock next to the website’s URL • being aware that scammers sometimes register domain names similar to those of reputable organisations
18
[Page #18]
 Skill Statement Entry level
 Level 1
 Glossary terms
• checking if the website looks professional and is written in good English and does not make unsubstantiated claims
• checking site reviews on consumer review /
comparison sites, being aware of the possibility of fake reviews
• checking that a company offering goods and services lists a place of business, that it is possible to contact them and that they have a returns policy.
19
[Page #19]
5. Being safe and responsible online
5.1 Skills statements
Entry level
Level 1
Protecting privacy
13
Identify situations where personal information may be stored by devices and online activity; identify and use simple methods to protect personal information and privacy.
Protect personal information and privacy, understanding personal rights and options for controlling the use of personal data.
Protecting data
14 Be aware of online risks and threats;
Protect devices and data from online risks and threats.
identify and use simple methods to protect a device and data from online risks and threats; be aware of the security risks of using public Wi-Fi.
15 Configure and use secure ways to access
Configure and use multifactor authentication to access and use online services.
devices and online services.
16
Backup data locally and using a cloud provider.
Being responsible online
17 Know how to report concerns with online
content.
18
Use appropriate language and behaviour online.
Digital wellbeing
19 Recognise and minimise the effects of physical stresses of being online.
Apply simple methods to avoid physical and psychological health risks while using devices.
20
[Page #20]
5.2 Amplification
 Glossary terms
 Skill Statement Entry level
 Level 1
Personal information … stored by devices and online activity refers to the collection and use of personal information and data by organisations (often used to personalise online experiences and target advertisements).
Methods of protecting personal information and privacy may include:
 personal
 Protecting privacy
information, device, personal data, GPS
• using multiple email addresses (to separate life and work or to hide identity if required) • considering the access privileges for apps
carefully during installation
• using private browsing • using the appropriate settings to keep your
Methods of protecting personal information and privacy may include:
social network activity private
• guarding your date of birth and
• using the appropriate settings on a mobile device to restrict or grant GPS location information
telephone number online
• using a pseudonym on social media sites • looking for HTTPs when entering login credentials or other personal data • being aware that the security of your digital devices can be compromised, hacked and/or hijacked etc.
• block unwanted communications from
selected users etc.
Know and understand key rights available under data protection law: the right to see what personal data organisations hold about you, to withdraw consent and demand that personal data can be rectified or deleted. It should be understood that options are available to control the use of personal data, e.g. cookie settings. It is not necessary to understand issues of data protection compliance relating to organisations.
Know and understand implications of sharing personal information.
Know when personal information may be stored by devices.
 Protecting data Methods of protecting devices and data
Methods of protecting devices and data include:
device, patch, multifactor authentication, external storage,
include:
• using anti-virus and firewalls
• using multi-factor authentication • encrypting hard drives
21
[Page #21]
 Glossary terms
 Skill Statement Entry level
 Level 1
browser, cloud provider, phishing
• securing mobile devices (using
• using a VPN where appropriate (to access a
screenlock etc.)
work network, for example)
• using secure passwords • being mindful of the security risks of
• using a password manager application • understanding that browsers can cache login details and the dangers of this on public computers.
using public Wi-Fi networks • being mindful of phishing emails • being mindful of risks associated with
Know and understand the advantages of backing up the data locally and to the cloud.
clicking on links found in emails or other digital messages.
Be aware of the nature of and threats posed by:
Secure ways to access a device include strong passwords, fingerprint, facial, voice recognition, or similar.
• worms • trojans • ransomware • identity theft.
Know and understand terminology and concepts relating to online risks and threats, how personal data may be compromised or stolen, how data and a device can be protected.
Be aware of commercial aspects and risk in a work environment.
Know that the security of digital devices can be compromised, hacked and/or hijacked, and be aware of the nature of and threats posed by viruses and phishing.
Concerns with online content could include illegal, inappropriate or harmful content.
Use appropriate language and behaviour online includes:
 Being
 online content
responsible online
•
respecting others online and not using inappropriate language, trolling or online harassment
22
[Page #22]
 Skill Statement Entry level
 Level 1
 Glossary terms
•
recognising that threatening, abusive or grossly offensive online communications could be a criminal offence
• blocking, filtering or reporting inappropriate
content respecting copyright and other intellectual property rights such as trademarks and software licenses that may restrict access or reuse of online content.
•
Know and understand that sending communications regarded as threatening, abusive or grossly offensive to another person using an online method including email, instant messaging or social media could be committing a criminal offence such as harassment or malicious communication.
Understand that company policies may prohibit activities, and carry serious sanctions for employees.
Know personal obligations with respect to copyright and other intellectual property rights and why you should not access such content without permission/license, and the risks and consequences of music / TV / film piracy.
Know how to block or filter inappropriate content or behaviour.
23
[Page #23]
 Skill Statement Entry level
 Level 1
 Glossary terms
Physical stresses include pain from poorly positioned equipment and/or bad posture, repetitive strain injury caused by repeated movements over a long period of time, eyestrain, headaches, etc.
Physical health risks refers to the risk of health problems developing as a consequence of physical stresses.
 Digital
wellbeing
Psychological health risks include addiction to online activity, or stress caused by factors including overuse of devices, cyber-bulling, fatigue, poor sleep patterns, etc.
Know and understand the terminology and concepts relating to potential physical stresses of using devices. Know that the effects can be minimised by using an adjustable chair which supports good posture, and not being too close or too far away from the screen/device and peripherals e.g. keyboard, mouse etc.
Methods to avoid physical and psychological health risks while using devices include taking regular breaks, using a wrist rest when using a mouse, limiting screen time, avoiding screen time close to bedtime, reporting cyberbullying, etc.
Know and understand the potential physical and psychological health risks arising from stresses of being online / using devices, and know how to avoid or minimise these, including:
• knowing not to respond to cyberbullying and
knowing how to report it
• knowing that setting time limits on device use reduces the risk of overuse and associated fatigue.
24
[Page #24]
Glossary
Word
Definition
The ease of use of a device, an application or content by a user.
Accessibility
A program designed for a specific purpose, such as word processing or graphic design.
Application
A file (or files) attached to an email or other form of electronic communication by the sender, and which can be read by the recipient.
Attachment
In the context of computer systems, authentication is a process that ensures and confirms a user’s identity.
Authentication
An application used to find and display information on the World Wide Web.
Browser
The cloud refers to software and services that run on the Internet, instead of locally on your computer.
Cloud
A cloud provider is a company that delivers cloud computing-based services and solutions to businesses and/or individuals.
Cloud provider
A cloud-based service is any service made available to users on demand via the Internet from a cloud computing provider’s server, as opposed to being provided from a company’s own on-premises servers.
Cloud-based services
Information on an individual (usually including an email address, telephone number, or similar) stored within a software application so that the person can be contacted.
Contacts
Functionality in applications designed to help people involved in a common task achieve their goals e.g. shared editing of a document.
Collaboration tools
A broad term for digital information, typically includes text, images and other rich media.
Content
[Page #25]
Word
Definition
A set of identifiers, attributes or information with which a user proves their claim to an identity/ account and enables authorised access to systems, information and services.
Credentials
The fact or quality of being generally accepted or in use.
Currency
A structured set of numbers, representing digitised text, images, sound, video or other information which can be processed or transmitted by a device.
Data
A piece of hardware or equipment that contains a microprocessor. Examples include PCs, laptops, smartphones, tablets and smartwatches.
Device
Digital collaboration is an interaction between two or more people, mediated by a computer.
Digital collaboration
Any media created, edited or viewed on a device, such as text, images, sound, video, and combinations of these (i.e. multimedia).
Digital content
Digital devices, applications and infrastructure that people use in life and work.
Digital environment
The (distributed) information about a person that exists on the Internet as a result of their online activity, and which can be used to identify a person. It includes the websites you visit, your search history, messages you send, and information you submit to online services.
Digital footprint
Digitised content that can be stored and processed in a device and transmitted over the internet or computer networks. This can include text, audio, video, and graphics.
Digital media
See folder.
Directory
A collection of digital content which can be created and edited on a device and stored in a file, and is often (although not always) intended for subsequent printing.
Document
External storage A device that stores information outside a computer. Such devices may be permanently attached to the computer or may be removable, or may be accessible over a network.
26
[Page #26]
Word
Definition
A store for data (e.g. a document, image, spreadsheet, database, etc.) which is typically stored on a hard drive or solid-state drive.
File
A file naming convention is a way of naming files that describes or indicates the content of the file or the use it is put to, and optionally includes date and/or time information.
File naming conventions
A folder (also called a directory) is a way to organise computer files. Files can be placed into a folder to group them together. Typically, folders can contain other folders to create a hierarchical storage system.
Folder
Global Positioning System (GPS) is a satellite navigation system used to determine the ground position of an object.
GPS
Visual representation of information in the form of diagrams, graphs and pictures.
Graphic
A hierarchy is an arrangement of items in which the items are represented as being "above", "below", or "at the same level as" one another.
Hierarchy
HyperText Transfer Protocol. HTTP is the underlying protocol used by the World Wide Web to transmit messages between browsers and web servers.
HTTP
HTTPS stands for Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure. It is the protocol where encrypted HTTP data is transferred over a secure connection.
HTTPS
Information is data that has meaning and is understood by a human being.
Information
The organisation of certain elements within a page. The 'elements' are usually images, text and perhaps active components such as video or animations. Layouts are usually for a purpose and audience – for example, a technical report for managers demands a different layout to a flyer for customers.
Layout
A hard drive or solid-state drive directly attached to the device being referenced.
Local storage
27
[Page #27]
Word
Definition
Transferring content or information (text, images, voice) from one person or device to another, by using any medium of digital communication.
Messaging
Metadata is data about data. It often provides information about the content of a digital item. For example, a file may have metadata indicating the size of the file, the format of the file, the creation date of the file, etc.
Metadata
Multi-factor authentication (MFA) is a security mechanism in which individuals are authenticated through more than one required security and validation procedure.
Multifactor authentication
Data that is measurable, such as time, height, weight, amount, etc.
Numerical data
A form of communication, using the various means available on the Internet to communicate and interact online to relay a message to a targeted audience, including email, instant message, text message, social media, blog, collaboration tools and services.
Online communication
A broad term for digital information on the internet, typically includes text, images and other rich media.
Online content
An online source of information provided by the relevant authority or organisation. Examples include government and local authority websites, school websites, weather services, etc.
Online information service
An operating system provides a platform on which applications can run and allows input from the user, and also manages files and directories on the data storage system.
Operating system
A patch is a set of changes to a computer program designed to update, fix, or improve it. This includes fixing security vulnerabilities and other bugs. Keeping a software system up to date with the latest patches is known as keeping it “patched”.
Patch
Personal data is information that relates to an identified or identifiable individual.
Personal data
28
[Page #28]
Word
Definition
See personal data.
Personal information
Describes fraudulent emails, texts or other messages designed to make the user share personal information such as login IDs, passwords and account numbers, which they may use to steal money, an individual’s identity or gain access to an individual’s device.
Phishing
An online communication to a private audience (specific individuals), e.g. a text message, direct message or email.
Private communication
Preference settings allow a user to select basic settings for an application, website or programme. It is a way of customising the application, website or programme to suit the user.
Preferences
An online communication to a public audience, e.g. a social media message or posting to an online forum. A public message is visible to anyone using a given communication channel.
Public communication
That which can be trusted.
Reliable
A hard drive or solid-state drive which is not directly attached to a device but is accessible from that device via a network or the Internet, for instance via the Cloud.
Remote storage
Typically, images, audio, videos etc. are considered rich media.
Rich media
A search engine is an online service which enables users to search for content on the web. A user enters keywords or phrases into the search engine and receives a list of results in the form of links to web pages, images, videos etc.
Search engine
The position at which a particular site appears in the results of a search engine query.
Search engine ranking
Making information accessible, by using digital technology, to specific individuals or more widely.
Sharing
29
[Page #29]
Word
Definition
Desktop sharing is a common name for technologies and products that allow remote access and remote collaboration using a person's computer desktop.
Shared desktop
Synchronisation The process of making two or more data storage devices or
software applications or devices have the same information at a given time.
Tagging is attaching some kind of information or label to a piece of digital content.
Tagging
Transactional services are online services which require the user to supply information in multiple steps, following the provided instructions at each step. Examples include central government services (e.g. applying for a passport, benefit calculators, accessing your income tax information, etc.), local government services (e.g. paying council tax online, requesting a refuse uplift (i.e. collection of household rubbish), etc.), applying for jobs, organising finances, etc.
Transactional online service
The address of a World Wide Web page.
URL
A check carried out (typically when creating a new online account) to ensure that the user has entered their details. Usually this will entail responding to an email sent to the email address they have entered when setting up the account.
Verification check
A call between two people at remote locations, using digital devices to provide a video and audio link between the two.
Video call
Video conference A meeting between a group of people at remote locations,
enabled by using computers or other digital devices to provide a video and audio link between all group members. Video conferences also often allow individuals to present information to the group, with all attendees seeing the same information at the same time.
30
[Page #30]
© Crown copyright 2019
This publication (not including logos) is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated. Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.
To view this licence:
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3 psi@nationalarchives.gov.uk Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London, TW9 4DU
visit email write to
About this publication:
enquiries www.education.gov.uk/contactus download www.gov.uk/government/publications
Reference: DfE-00082-2019
Follow us on Twitter: @educationgovuk
Like us on Facebook: facebook.com/educationgovuk
31
