7 Principles of Moonshots
A moonshot should:
excite and inspire the public, academia, and industry;
help solve an important societal issue;
be truly disruptive and ground-breaking;
focus on areas where the underpinning science is at a stage to make a major breakthrough feasible;
be specific and well-defined in what it sets out to achieve, with a clear timeframe for completion;
take advantage of areas where the UK is, or is poised to be, a world leader; and
generate significant additional benefits.
Defining a Moonshot
• A moonshot should have a high level of ambition
•
Ground-breaking, seismic shift and with broad systemic change
• A moonshot must have a realistic prospect of success, but not necessarily guaranteed
• The timeframe for the impact from a moonshot is expected to be between 5 to 25 years
• Moonshots are expected to deliver systemic and broad societal impact that create the necessary developments, attitudes and innovative technology to support their delivery
• We are interested in ideas for Moonshots across the Pioneer Innovation strategic priorities:
•
Health innovations (human, animal and plant)
• Green industrial growth
• Resilient UK
• Transformative technologies
Moonshots and Benefits Realisation
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 Phase 4 Phase 5 Moonshot 1 Year 0 Year 3 Year X Benefits Benefits Benefits Benefits Benefits Benefits
Moonshots should have measurable goals designed to have a significant impact on important societal issues both during the lifetime of the moonshot and beyond. It is likely that they will encompass a series of activities, each with realisable benefits.
Submitting your idea
We are seeking ideas for moonshots via a very brief online form covering
o What is your Moonshot idea?
In no more than 2 sentences (300 characters max) you should convey what your Moonshot idea is and why is it transformational
o Why does this idea require a Moonshot type approach?
In no more than 100* words – explain why this idea requires the scale, co-ordination and duration of activity typical of a Moonshot.
o If successful what difference would this Moonshot create for the UK and globally?
In no more than 100* words – explain the relevance of this idea to having a significant global impact
o Who from across research, industry and business (small and large) could form a consortia to work on this moonshot and how might you go about convening this?
We don’t expect you to have convened any consortia at the point of submitting your idea, but this will be expected and a core part of the next steps for any selected ideas
In no more than 100* words – explain the potential for wider collaboration
Proposers of the most promising ideas will have the opportunity to present them to a panel of experts, either virtually or at a physical event.
Choosing promising ideas
Ideas will be reviewed by an internal UKRI/DSIT panel
All applications to be reviewed anonymously and will be considered according to 3 criteria:
o
Is this idea a Moonshot? (Yes/No)
o
Is this idea Transformational?
o
Where are the communities of interest that could be convened to develop and deliver this moonshot?
We are particularly interested in proposals with a high level of creativity and adventure that take research and innovation beyond current frontiers to create transformative value for society.
UK’s Pioneering Moonshots: Key Information required in presenting your idea
Invitations to present ideas to the panel may involve bringing together proposers of related ideas.
You will have 5 minutes to present your idea to the panel, and it is recommended this includes:
1.
A brief summary / recap of the idea
2.
An explanation as to why the focus area of the moonshot presents a valuable opportunity for the UK
3.
An overview of why the idea is particularly innovative
4.
A summary of why the Moonshot is plausibly achievable given the UK’s strengths and partnerships.
5.
Explanation of the key benefits that might be delivered throughout the moonshot, and its long term impact
The panel will have an opportunity to ask you questions about your moonshot idea
Scoring Methodology Guidance for Panel Members
The Panel will assess Moonshot ideas using the following criteria.
1.
Importance of opportunity to the UK
2.
Extent to which the idea is innovative
3.
Use of the expert community domestically and internationally
4.
Scale and significance of the benefits and long term impact
Moonshot Framework
If the UK is unable to associate with Horizon Europe, Moonshot ideas will be rapidly developed to make the case for investment, working closely with proposers. If we associate, the ideas will feed in to UKRI’s future work programme, and may be developed over a longer timeframe. Development of the ideas will require the elements set out in the table below.
﻿Title  ,"One sentence description of the moonshot, ensuring it meets the 7 principles of a moonshot, is well-defined and timebound.  "
Rationale and Alignment:  What is the need for change in this area and how does it align with government priorities?  ,"The need for change and market or system failure that moonshot relates to, including the risks and/or negative consequences of not acting. This should be specific to the consequences for the UK, taking into account the global context. It should include how the moonshot aligns with current government strategy and priorities.  "
Innovation:  How is this novel / new / different?  ,How the moonshot is innovative in both concept and proposed execution.  
Capability:  In what ways is the UK well placed to become a world leader in this area?  ,"How the moonshot builds on existing strengths within the UK, and how this work would seek to deliver a significant acceleration of the UK’s global influence and strategic advantage in this area. Any specific weaknesses which the UK needs to improve or overcome in order to succeed in this moonshot.  "
Impact & Outcomes:  What are the anticipated impacts? When will these be realised?  ,"The anticipated short, medium and long term impacts and benefits of the moonshot (and it’s component missions) on the UK economy, it’s citizens, and the UK’s positioning on the world stage. This should include the direct impacts of the moonshot, and also potential opportunities which could reasonably be expected to arise as a consequence. Impacts and benefits should be expressed with timescales, to show those that are delivered at intermediate stages, and those which are only fully realised on successful delivery of the whole moonshot.  "
Deliverability:  What and who do you require to be involved to deliver this proposal successfully?  ,"The resources and organisations / institutions needed in order to deliver the moonshot successfully, including any risks and mitigations. This should show the distinct stages of work and the links between them. Any dependencies on other programmes of work, and any policy or regulatory changes which may pose a risk to or influence delivery.  "
International Collaboration:  How will you capitalise on the international community to maximise the benefits to the UK?  ,"How the moonshot includes utilisation of the international community to maximum effect, ensuring the UK is well placed to benefit from such collaboration and coordination. Clearly articulate the expected incremental value of working with international partners or collaborators relative to not doing so.  "

Pioneer Innovation
Pioneer Innovation Overview
Pioneer Innovation is a portfolio of programmes that will bring together the UK’s world-class research base and innovative businesses to collaborate with the best partners both domestically and globally
Pioneer Innovation is designed to harness emerging transformational technologies to build UK capabilities and to create and grow markets.
Directed by four priorities and focusing within the seven technology families outlined in the UK Innovation Strategy, Pioneer Innovation will support the development, adoption and diffusion of technologies and innovations across the full range of technology readiness levels (TRLs) levels.
Complementing the main themes of Pioneer Global, the portfolio will deliver against four priorities – health innovations, green industrial growth, resilient UK, and transformative technologies to deliver UK strategic advantage and boost productivity and growth.
Funded activities will be split between programme activities and priority area Moonshot(s)
Overview of Health Innovations – Human, Animal and Plants
To drive healthcare innovation across diagnosis, prevention and treatment to enable people to live healthier lives for longer and embed the UK’s position as a leading global destination for life sciences.
The portfolio will aim to accelerate human, animal and plant health research and innovation, to establish the UK as a global leader in biosecurity to protect our population from a range of biological threats, including emerging infectious diseases and antimicrobial resistance.
To achieve this ambition, this theme would invest in key interventions which could include bioinformatics, biomanufacturing and genomics, digital pathology and health behaviours.
Overview of Green Industrial Growth
NSTC is committed to supporting an environmentally sustainable and resilient UK, delivering on Net Zero and contributing to a globally sustainable natural environment through innovation and green industrial growth.
Achieving net zero is the biggest challenge the planet faces, but also creates a significant opportunity for green industries and economic growth in areas such as decarbonisation technologies and techniques.
Building on our Net Zero Strategy, Pioneer Innovation will seek to embed the UK as a world leader and collaborator in sustainability, net zero and decarbonisation by investing in key technologies that underpin this ambition, across key industries that could include transport, infrastructure, agritech, energy and advanced manufacturing.
Overview of Resilient UK – Resources and National Security
From energy and resource supply shocks to geopolitical challenge, resilience is a key priority for the UK to thrive.
Key areas for potential research and industrial partnerships could include responding to challenges with new engineering, life sciences and social sciences solutions to help remediate the impact of human activity on the natural environment, protect biodiversity, advance climate resilient agriculture and aquaculture, and embed climate resilience solutions across society.
Rather than focusing on the opportunities for economic growth in response to net zero, this theme will focus on mitigating the impact of a changing global climate with a strong focus on remaining resilient despite these changes.
Looking to resource resilience, it could explore future renewable energy, hydrogen production and understanding how our deep sea can provide access a range of assets from critical minerals to future pharmaceuticals.
From a security perspective, it could include clean space, cyber-attack shielding, or integrated behavioural and technological techniques to improve public safety and resilience. We know one of the biggest challenges facing society is disinformation, social violence and radicalisation, for example, and that we need to draw on social sciences, arts and humanities research to understand how best to address these challenges.
Overview of Transformative Technologies
