[Page #0]
THE NATIONAL  SKILLS STRATEGY 
IMPLEMENTATION REPORT 
National Skills Strategy
JUNE 2021
[Page #1]
None
[Page #2]
THE NATIONAL  SKILLS STRATEGY 
[Page #3]
National Skills Strategy
2
[Page #4]
Contents
3
CO N T E N T S
TWO YEARS OF THE NATIONAL SKILLS STRATEGY.............................. 06
1  WHAT IS THE STATUS OF CONTINUING EDUCATION 
AND TRAINING IN GERMANY? ........................................................... 08
Developments in the labour market ...........................................................09
Current situation and challenges .................................................................10
Facts and figures on CET ..............................................................................12
2 
 WHAT HAVE WE ACHIEVED SO FAR? ................................................. 16
A | At a glance: Key priority areas and implementing 
the National Skills Strategy .................................................................. . 17
B | Findings from the ten key priority areas ...............................................23
C | In focus: Contributions to digitalisation in CET ..................................59
3  WHAT REMAINS TO BE DONE? ........................................................... 64
4  W HAT HAPPENS NEXT? ........................................................................ 68
REFERENCES  ............................................................................................... 72
[Page #5]
4
[Page #6]
55
The National Skills Strategy was adopted by the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, the  Federal  Ministry  of  Education  and  Research,  the  Federal  Ministry  for  Economic  Affairs and Energy, the Federal Employment Agency, three Conferences of Ministers of the Länder (ASMK, KMK and WMK), trade unions, and employer and business associations in June 2019.
Within ten key priority areas, the partners agreed to measures and activities for advancing the continuing education and training (CET) system and strengthening Germany’s CET culture. They stipulated that in 2021, the state of implementation and objectives of the National Skills Strategy would be reviewed and, where necessary, further developed.
Further, the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and the Federal Ministry of Educa-tion and Research commissioned the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Develop-ment (OECD) to monitor the implementation process by way of a country report on CET in Germany. The OECD report was published on 23 April 2021.
The present implementation report for the National Skills Strategy documents what has been achieved thus far. It contains recommendations for the advancement of the key priority areas and shows the outlook for the continuation of a strategic approach to strengthening CET and the CET culture in Germany.
[Page #7]
National Skills Strategy
6
Much progress, much accomplished, much remains to be done
Two years of the National Skills Strategy
The past two years were an eventful period. The COVID-19 pandemic has reminded us once again  how  infinitely  valuable  and  important  the  people  are  who  keep  things  going  during crises and develop solutions to help us quickly get back on our feet. In particular, nurses and carers, teachers and IT specialists are called upon to manage the many challenges of a com-pletely new routine under pandemic conditions – thanks to sheer ability and the willingness to improvise.
The crisis is not yet over, but we hope for economic recovery in the near future. At the same time, we are aware that one of the pandemic’s effects was to accelerate structural change in the world of work. Digitalisation has picked up pace and made such developments as mobile work a routine matter for many employees. The consequences of the crisis are also percepti-ble in the labour market. The number of long-term unemployed persons is rising and, simul-taneously, the skilled worker gap in understaffed professions such as electrical technology, nursing and geriatric care is growing wider.
Given the circumstances, the claim that continuing education and train-ing are the basis for successful economic activity has become all the more true. New products and applications are being developed at a rapid pace. Germany is in an outstanding position with regard to vocational training, thereby laying a solid foundation for continued participation in the labour market. But, as a rule, it is not enough to stay up-to-date with the every day routine right up to retirement. That is what makes a solid continuing edu-cation and training (CET) system important. Well-qualified skilled workers are key to the implementation of innovation, which maintains our position of growth and prosperity in international competition. The employees of today must also be able to do the work of tomorrow.
HUBERTUS HEIL
has  been  Germany’s  Minister for  Labour  and  Social  Affairs since March 2018.
That  is  why  we  have  come  together  in  a  broad  political  and  social  alli-ance under the umbrella of the National Skills Strategy. In June 2019, the 17 partners from the Federation and the Länder, employer and business associations,  trade  unions  and  the  Federal  Employment  Agency  defined numerous  commitments  within  10  key  priority  areas  with  the  aim  of strengthening the CET culture in Germany. Since that time, we have made great progress in implementing our commitments.
One  of  the  political  scientist’s primary  objectives  in  carrying out his office is to enable every­one  to  have  the  opportunity  to enjoy  a  self­determined  life, thereby  providing  protection and security in an era of change.
[Page #8]
National Skills Strategy
7
Our approach has helped us to attain a favourable position in international comparison. In its most recent country report, the OECD confirmed that with the National Skills Strategy, Germany has laid a crucial foundation for strengthening both its CET system and its competitiveness.
BUT WHAT EXACTLY HAVE WE ACCOMPLISHED SO FAR?
First of all, the partners discussed the challenges in innovation labs and workshops with many experts and practitioners and discovered new paths to many solutions. Together, we have already implemented or initiated the implementation of three-quarters of our commitments.
ANJA KARLICZEK
has been Germany’s Minister for Education  and  Research  since March 2018.
Not  least  due  to  her  own  voca­tional  training  and  experience as  an  instructor,  the  business economist  is  committed  to  the equality  of  vocational  and  aca­demic  education  and  training and  to  the  reduction  of  barriers in individual career paths.
All the participants have gone through a very intense process in the past two  years.  We  would  like  to  express  our  gratitude  to  everyone  who, through their engagement, made the National Skills Strategy and its im-plementation a matter of personal concern. It was well worth the effort. As evidenced in the present implementation report, it enabled us to es-tablish and develop an excellent culture of collaboration.
WE HAVE ACCOMPLISHED A LOT, YET MUCH REMAINS TO BE DONE
The implementation report documents how we can continue to enhance the CET landscape in Germany. Above all, digitalisation creates opportunities for more employees participating in CET and skills development programmes. It creates more transparency with regard to pro-grammes and higher flexibility in the implementation of skills development measures.
Making continuing education and training strong in order to strengthen skilled workers and the economy in turn is in the common interest of the National Skills Strategy partners. We bear the responsibility together – in companies, with social partners and in employment man-agement, as well as at the Länder and federal government levels. If we are successful at pro-viding new paths of access to education and work, it will have been worth the effort. After all, the time to invest in our future is now!
[Page #9]
S E C T I O N  1
What is the status of continuing education and training in Germany?
[Page #10]
9
Developments in the labour market
Since the National Skills Strategy was presented in summer 2019, the structural change in the private  sector  and  in  the  world  of  work  that  is  primarily  driven  by  digitalisation  and  decar-bonisation has progressed. In some areas, further acceleration of the change process can be observed. The conversion of the German economy to carbon neutrality is gaining momentum due to strengthened climate-policy targets at the EU level and national measures such as the federal government’s National Hydrogen Strategy. An added factor is demographic change. The baby-boom generation is beginning to enter retirement and the trend has become noticeable in the labour market. This contributes to a shrinking working population in the face of growing demand for labour migration.
Independent of medium-term trends, society is currently feeling the im-pact of the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result of the lockdown measures, Germany’s economy slipped into a recession in the first half of 2020. Over-all, gross domestic product shrank by five per cent in 2020, whereby in-dividual areas of the economy such as manufacturing and the hospitality industry  were  clearly  hit  much  harder.  Up  to  six  million  employees  had periods of short-time work or furlough in the interim. Such measures in conjunction with sector policy and collective bargaining measures for em-ployment  protection,  as  well  as  interim  financial  aid,  limited  the  rise  in unemployment. At the  end  of  2020,  around  half  a  million more persons were unemployed than the year before. Of these, more than half had not had formal vocational training. At the structural level, it can be simultaneously observed that the  crisis  caused  by  the  pandemic  also  contributed  to  the  further  acceleration  of  the  digital transformation: for example, due to the boom in online retailing.
According to the federal government’s skilled labour monitoring tool, it is currently estimated that by 2040 around 5.3 million jobs will dis-appear but, at the same time, around 3.6 million new jobs will be created.
With a focus on the coming years, studies show that between ten and 15 per cent of employees in Germany are at high risk of their previous professional roles being replaced by technology.1 If jobs for which significant change is expected are also considered, according to an Organisation for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development  (OECD)  estimate  the  number  of  jobs  affected rises to more than one-half (54 per cent).2
The  federal  government’s  Fachkräftemonitoring  skilled  labour  monitoring  tool  currently  es-timates  that  by  2040  around  5.3  million  jobs  will  disappear,  simultaneously  making  way  for around 3.6 million new ones.3 The calculations also cover the impact of the COVID-19 pandem-ic. The disappearance of jobs can be explained in part by the demographic development towards a  reduced  labour  force  size  (1.7  million  fewer  persons). When  the ‘retirement  effect’  caused 
1 Arntz, M., Gregory, T., Zierahn, U. (2020): Digitalisierung und die Zukunft der Arbeit. Wirtschaftsdienst (13), DOI: 10.1007/s10273-020-2614-6.
2 Nedelkoska, L., Quintini, G. (2018): Automation, skills use and training. In: OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers, No. 202. OECD Publishing, Paris. URL: dx.doi.org/10.1787/2e2f4eea-en
3 Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs (pub.) (2021): Forschungsbericht 526/3: Aktualisierte BMAS-Prognose ‘Digitalisierte Arbeitswelt’. Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, Berlin. 
[Page #11]
10
by demographics is considered, the emerging and disappearing jobs resulting from structural change balance each other net-net at  around 3.6 million.  Jobs will  emerge and  disappear in different industries and sectors, causing a significant rise in the need for employees to start new careers or switch careers. The skills requirements and tasks associated with existing jobs will change as well. In various sectors of the economy, a trend towards higher qualification can be observed,4 and meta skills such as the ability to grasp complex facts, work in a team, be creative and develop solutions are becoming increasingly important.5 To some extent, this development goes hand in hand with the stronger growth of jobs for low-qualified employees in comparison to the middle qualification range: take the case of machine manufacturing, for example.6
Current situation and challenges
Germany  has  a  complex  and  highly  differentiated  landscape  of  professional,  vocational  and general continuing education and training (CET), which often builds upon the proven system of initial training and enables transitions between general and professional or vocational CET. In the present implementation report and in accordance with the objective of the National Skills Strategy, the primary focus is on professional or vocational CET.
A high proportion of CET activity takes place within companies. As a result, social and business partners play a central role in the overall structure of CET, the organisation of which is market- based and encompasses around 18,000 public and private CET providers.7 At the same time, the system is structured by various regulatory levels and a number of legal bases. Alongside the business and social partners, the German Federation (federal government), Länder and the 
4 Matthes, B., Müller, G. (2021): Ergebnisse der Machbarkeitsstudie Kompetenz-Kompass zu den Branchen Maschinenbau, IKT und Gesundheitswesen. Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, Berlin. 
5 Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs (2021).
6 Matthes, B., Müller, G. (2021).
7 Federal Institute for Vocational Education and Training (2020): Datenreport zum Berufsbildungsbericht 2020. Ratgeber zur beruflichen Weiterbildung. Federal Institute for Vocational Education and Training, Bonn.
[Page #12]
11
Federal  Employment Agency  are  key  stakeholders.  Beyond  collective  bargaining  and  compa-ny agreements, the regulations of the German Vocational Training Act (Berufsbildungsgesetz), Crafts  Code  (Handwerksordnung),  Upgrading  Training  Assistance  Act  (Aufstiegsfortbildungs-förderungsgesetz), Works Constitution Act (Betriebsverfassungsgesetz), the German Social Code Books II and III (Sozialgesetzbücher II und III) and various regulations at the Länder level have an impact. Länder-level regulations include laws about CET, educational leave and university personnel structure and internal organisation, state-specific regulations on specific occupations and funding programmes. 
In  general,  the  guiding  basis  for  action  is  and  will  remain  the  premise  that  companies,  em-ployees and public authorities share the responsibility and obligation for CET and its financing. While on the one hand the overall architecture of CET policy permits the regional adaptation of programmes to the relevant target group, on the other hand the multi-layer organisation-al structure of CET demands a high level of cooperation and coordination among the various stakeholders.
In view of the profound structural and technological changes that are taking place, the impor-tance of CET for companies, employees and job seekers has clearly grown. This also includes personnel  planning  and  development  and  the  determination  of  qualification needs.  CET  is  essential  for  retaining  and  increasing  companies’  innovation  and performance  levels  on  the  one  hand  and  employment  security  and  self-deter-mined  professional  or  vocational  development  perspectives  on  the  other.  The income of each and every person must also be safeguarded. Here, the proactive, precautionary qualification of employees must be ensured. The existence of suf-ficient numbers of skilled workers with the right skills will also be instrumental in deciding the extent to which Germany’s economy is future-proof. For example, the most recent Commission of Experts for Research and Innovation (EFI) report recommends  the  ‘testing  of  tools  for  the  support  of  preventive  upskilling  that makes it easier for employees to switch to a new employer in time and involve both the giving and receiving companies’.8
The National Skills Strategy makes an impor-tant contribution to leveraging Germany’s oppor-tunities for trans-formation.
The National Skills Strategy is not only part of the federal government’s skilled labour strat-egy,9 it also lays the groundwork for deepening cooperation among the various stakeholders, advancing the CET system and strengthening Germany’s CET culture. It makes an important contribution to leveraging Germany’s opportunities for transformation, shaping the future and offering protection and monitoring in the process. 
8  EFI – Commission of Experts for Research and Innovation (2021): Report [on German research, innovation and technological ability] 2021. EFI, Berlin.
9  The National Skills Strategy focuses on professional or vocational continuing education and training. It aims to either safeguard vocational competence, in the case of upskilling and refresher training, or increase vocational competence, in the case of personal and professional development and upgrading training. It also aims to enable professional advancement. Retraining or return-to-learn programmes to acquire basic skills or obtain a vocational qualification can also be regarded as professional or vocational CET in a broader sense. The aim of in-company CET is to meet skills needs within organisations.
[Page #13]
12
Facts and figures on CET
ACTIVE POPULATION
In general, many persons are highly motivated to participate in CET. According to NEPS – Na-tionales Bildungspanel, a longitudinal survey on education processes and skills development in Germany, 30 per cent of employed persons would like to acquire further qualification through a CET programme.10 At the same time, there are also groups of people whose awareness of the importance of CET and motivation to participate could be raised. With a view to the actual in-dividual CET activities, the latest data of the Adult Education Survey (AES) from 2018 show that 54 per cent of adults ages 18-64 have participated in CET. That is an increase of four percent-age points in comparison to 2016.11 Differentiated consideration by employment situation and employment status reveals large differences among CET participants. For example, the propor-tion of employed persons in CET was the highest (59 per cent), followed by persons in school or vocational training (56 per cent) and unemployed persons (49 per cent). Measured in time spent (hours), the allocation of CET activities came to approx. 45 per cent in CET measures, around 33 per cent in individual, occupation-related CET measures and around 21 per cent in non-occupation-related CET measures.12 The average duration of a CET course depends heavily on the relevant segment. According to the AES, in-company CET lasts 29 hours on average.  And on average, 153 hours are spent in individual CET and 56 hours are spent for non-professional or vocational CET.13
ACTIVE COMPANIES
The proportion of companies active in CET has continued to rise in recent years, according to the Institute for Employment Research (IAB) Establishment Panel. In the first six months of 2016, companies (53 per cent) actively pursued CET.14 Participation varied strongly with company size. While 44 per cent of micro-entities with fewer than 10 employees were active in CET, almost all large companies with at least 500 employees (98 per cent) were active.15 Further company surveys yielded significantly higher CET participation, which can be caused by differences in the time periods studied, the underlying CET-related terminology or the duration of the CET activity surveyed. For example, according to the 2020 German Economic Institute CET survey, the CET participation of German companies in 2019 was around 88 per cent.16 Almost nine out of ten companies consider CET a key response to the digitalisation of the world of work17 and more than 40 per cent already have a dedicated CET strategy.18
10 Ehlert, M. (2020): Individuelle berufsbezogene Weiterbildung und Umschulung: Aktuelle Daten zu Bedarf und Teilnahme aus dem NEPS. Präsentation im Rahmen des Fachgesprächs des Gesprächskreises Weiterbildungspolitik am 02.09.2020. Friedrich-Ebert-Foundation, Berlin.
11 Federal Ministry of Education and Research (pub.) (2019): Weiterbildungsverhalten in Deutschland 2018. Ergebnisse des Adult Education Survey – AES-Trendbericht. Federal Ministry of Education and Research, Bonn, p 13, Fig. 2.
12 Federal Ministry of Education and Research. p 44, Fig. 15.
13 Federal Ministry of Education and Research. p 43, Fig. 12.
14 Institute for Employment Research Establishment Panel (2017): Daten. Institute for Employment Research press conference ‘Betriebliche Weiterbildung’ on 22 March 2017.
15 Federal Institute for Vocational Education and Training (2018): Datenreport zum Berufsbildungsbericht 2018, Informationen und Analysen zur Entwicklung der beruflichen Bildung. Federal Ministry of Education and Research, Bonn, p 348 et seq. 
16 Seyda, S., Placke, B. (2020): IW-Weiterbildungserhebung 2020: Weiterbildung auf Wachstumskurs. in: IW-Trends (04/2020), German Economic Institute (pub.), Cologne. 
17 Association of German Chambers of Industry and Commerce (2017): Wachsende Herausforderungen treffen auf größeren Optimismus. Das IHK-Unternehmensbarometer zur Digitalisierung. DIHK, Berlin and Brussels.
18 Bitkom/TüV Verband (pub.) (2018): Weiterbildung für die digitale Arbeitswelt: Eine repräsentative Untersuchung von Bitkom Research im Auftrag des VdTÜV e. V. und des Bitkom e. V. Berlin. 
[Page #14]
13
CET spending
according to the Educational Finance Report
16.6 bn 
11.7 bn 
EUR2017
EUR2007
PROGRAMMES
More than 18,000 public and private providers offer CET programmes. When considering the provider side of CET, the ideal-typical attribution of providers is to one of four contexts: the state with a public service context, communities, the market (commercial providers) and com-panies. In 2018, 17 per cent of the CET activities identified in the AES fell under the community context, 13 per cent the state, 22 per cent commercial and at 45 per cent, almost half were attributable to in-company providers.19
INFLUENCING FACTORS
A  number  of  factors  influence  the  need  for  skills  development  and  participation  in  CET,  in-cluding the macroeconomic environment, business and company decisions and, ultimately, the specific further progress of structural change. Other factors and challenges are linked to the consideration of sociodemographic aspects. For example, persons with a migration background (first generation), low-skilled persons and those with low literacy participate significantly less frequently in CET courses.20 According to a current study by University of  Hamburg, there are around 6.2 million persons with low literacy in Germany. Of them, a total of 62.3 per cent are employed.21 According to the 2018 Employment Survey conducted by the Federal Institute for Vocational Education and Training and the Federal Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (BIBB/BAuA), the CET rate for employed persons in unskilled jobs is only around half as high as that of employed persons in skilled jobs.22 In this context, the type of job also plays a key role. Data show that, on average, employed persons in jobs with a likelihood of being replaced by digital technologies participate less often in CET.23 Further, women participate less frequently in work-related CET than men.24 The differences are primarily due to differences in the scope of employment, occupational status, the incidence of fixed-term or marginal employment and, 
19 Author group of the National Report on Education (2020): Bildung in Deutschland 2020. Ein indikatorengestützter Bericht mit einer Analyse zu Bildung in einer digitalisierten Welt. Funded by the Standing Conference of the Ministers of Education and Cultural Affairs of the Länder in the Federal Republic of Germany and the Federal Ministry for Education and Research. In: Deutsche Nationalbibliothek. URL: http://portal.dnb.de 
20 Federal Ministry of Education and Research (pub.) (2019): Weiterbildungsverhalten in Deutschland 2018. Ergebnisse des Adult Education Survey – AES-Trendbericht. Federal Ministry of Education and Research, Bonn, p 30.
21 Grotelüschen, A., Buddeberg, K., Dutz, G., Heilmann, L., Stammer, C. (2019): Leo 2018. Leben mit geringer Literalität. Press brochure, Hamburg, pp 20, 170.
22 Hall, A., Sevindik, U. (2018): Einfacharbeit in Deutschland – wer arbeitet was unter welchen Bedingungen? Ergebnisse aus der BIBB/BAuA-Erwerbstätigenbefragung 2018. Federal Institute for Vocational Education and Training, Bonn. 
23 Heß, P., Janssen, S., Leber, U. (2019): Beschäftigte, deren Tätigkeiten durch Technologien ersetzbar sind, bilden sich seltener weiter. IAB-Kurzbericht 16/2019. Institute for Employment Research, Nuremberg.
24 Federal Ministry of Education and Research (2019), p 32.
[Page #15]
14
last but not least, the need to take on private care work within the family context.25 The most frequently cited obstacles for potential participants were lack of time and financial considera-tions. The lower the household income, the greater the challenge involved in the realisation of CET ambitions. For both men and women, the existence of children or persons requiring care in the household significantly reduced the likelihood of participating in CET.26 And ‘learning skills atrophy’ also has a negative effect on motivation for CET. In one survey, a good two-thirds of employed persons without any full formal or vocational qualification agreed with the statement that they are no longer used to learning and view that as an obstacle.27 The question of whether needs-compatible and tailored CET programmes are available is thus also an influencing factor.
INVESTMENT
According to the Educational Finance Report (Bildungsfinanzbericht),28 total expenditure for CET was €16.6 billion in 2017.29 The public sector’s proportion of total financing was €5.6 billion. Ten years earlier, total expenditure for CET was €11.7 billion with a public sector proportion of total financing equal to €4.0 billion. Accordingly, the solid 33 per cent public sector proportion of total financing has remained stable.30 Data from the IW Survey of Further Training (German Economic Institute) indicated an increase in corporate investment from €27 billion (2009) to €41 billion (2019). Other studies, however, indicate considerably lower corporate investment amounts.31 These studies employ different bases for calculation and model calculations of var-ying resilience. In this context, an Institute for Employment Research study on the macro-fiscal impact of CET funding showed that higher investment in CET can generate higher fiscal return flows.32 Therefore, it can be assumed that alongside the individual benefits of CET, education also yields a high macroeconomic return. 
25 Federal Ministry of Education and Research. p 33.
26 Ehlert, M. (2020).
27 Osiander, C., Stephan, G. (2018): Gerade geringqualifizierte Beschäftigte sehen bei der beruflichen Weiterbildung viele Hürden. in: IAB-Forum, 2 August 2018. URL: iab-forum.de/gerade-geringqualifizierte-beschaeftigte-sehen-bei-der-beruflichen-weiterbildung-viele-huerden/
28 The Educational finance report does not completely map CET expenditure. In particular, it does not contain the fiscal funding of CET costs and therefore underestimates public sector CET expenditure. The report includes expenditure for in-company CET, the support of CET participants, adult education centres and other educational programmes.
29 Federal Statistical Office (2020): Bildungsfinanzbericht 2020. Im Auftrag des Bundesministeriums für Bildung und Forschung und der Ständigen Konferenz der Kultusminister der Länder in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland. Destatis, Wiesbaden. 
30 When the tax deductibility of CET costs as part of advertising costs is considered, government expenditure increases by an estimated €6.5 to €7 billion.
31 Dohmen, D., Cordes, M. (2019): Kosten der Weiterbildung in Deutschland. Verteilung der Finanzlasten auf Unternehmen, Privatpersonen, öffentliche Hand. Study as part of the ‘Economic and regional costs, funding structures and benefits of continuing education’ project. Funded by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research, FiBS Forum No. 61, FiBS Research Institute for the Economics of Education and Social Affairs, Berlin.
32 Kruppe, T., Mühlhan, J., Weber, E., Wiemers, J. (2019): Gesamtfiskalische Wirkungen von Weiterbildungsförderung: Öffentliche Ausgaben generieren hohe Rückflüsse. IAB-Kurzbericht 08/2019, Institute for Employment Research, Nuremberg.
[Page #16]
15
54%of adults 18-64 participated in CET in 20189out of10
Share of CET participation:
49   %
59   %
of unemployed persons
of employed persons
 18,000
morethan
companies
public and private providersmake CET programmes available.
consider CET the main answer tothe digitalisation of the world of work. 
INTERNATIONAL COMPARISON
Germany is known for its highly developed vocational training system. More than one in two German adults has a vocational qualification in accordance with ISCED level 3-4 (ISCED = the UNESCO International Standard Classification of Education). That is the second-highest pro-portion among all OECD countries.33 At just over 60 per cent, only Slovakia has an even higher proportion. In the last European survey in 2016, with a 52 per cent proportion of adults who participate  in  lifelong  learning  (in  formal,  non-formal  and  informal  contexts),  Germany  lies significantly above the EU average (just under 45 per cent).34 With regard to participation in non-formal education, Germany’s rate rose by four percentage points between 2016 and 2018 to 54 per cent. Compared to other European OECD nations, adults in Germany (ages 25 to 64) learn more frequently in non-formal settings and less frequently in formal and informal ones.35If the learning intensity with which persons participate in formal educational and CET activities is considered, Germany has the highest levels by far. On average, the formal educational and CET activities of adults add up to a total of 872 lessons per year. This is equal to more than five months of full-time studies.36
33 OECD (2021): Continuing Education and Training in Germany. Getting Skills Right. OECD Publishing, Paris, p 30, Fig. 1.9.
34 The next European AES survey will be conducted in 2022. 
35 Formal education includes courses of education at the primary and secondary levels and the tertiary educational sector. Non-formal education encompasses all organised teaching/learning settings that are not integrated into the German Qualifications Framework. All forms of self-organised learning are considered to be informal learning as long as the intention to learn is present.
36 OECD (2021), p 40.
[Page #17]
16
S E C T I O N  2
What have we achieved so far?
[Page #18]
17
A | AT A GLANCE
Key priority areas and implementing the National Skills Strategy
The changes in the labour market, in particular the digital and ecological transformation, are posing major challenges to continuing education and training (CET) in Germany. CET must be so aligned that it contributes towards the success of structural change – for the economy as a whole, for companies and for every individual. The National Skills Strategy makes a key contri-bution to this by framing CET as a natural part of everyday life and laying the groundwork for a new culture of CET.
In autumn 2018, a consultation and discussion process with a total of 17 partner institutions was initiated. The aim was to develop a common strategic approach to strengthening CET in Germany. The partners agreed to the ten key priority areas listed below, and in June 2019 a joint strategy paper was published. In the strategy paper, the partners declared the aim of safeguarding or improving the occupational participation and vocational competence of all persons  who  are  able  to  work,  including  the  unemployed  and  job  seekers.  Employees  and companies  should  be  supported  as  they  manage  and  shape  structural  change  according  to their  needs.  CET  measures  as  part  of  upskilling  and  refresher  training  as  well  as  develop-ment  and  upgrading  training  are  particularly  important  here.  Retraining  or  second-chance programmes to acquire basic skills or obtain a vocational qualification are just as important. Within ten defined key priority areas, the partners have committed to concrete measures and input in order to implement the strategy paper’s aims.
[Page #19]
18
KEY PRIORITY AREAS OF THE NATIONAL SKILLS STRATEGY
1.  Supporting the transparency of CET opportunities and programmes
2.  Closing gaps in support, creating new incentives, adapting existing support systems
3.  Ensuring full-coverage, lifelong CET guidance and strengthening skills development 
advisory services, particularly for small and medium-sized enterprises
4.  Strengthening the responsibility of the social partners
5.  Reviewing and enhancing the quality and quality assessment of CET programmes 
and products
6.  Increasing the visibility of and recognising the skills acquired by workers through 
vocational education and training
7.  Developing further training qualifications and CET programmes
8.  Strategically advancing educational institutions as centres of excellence for 
professional/vocational CET
9.  Strengthening CET personnel and equipping them with the skills required for the 
digital transformation
10. Strengthening strategic forecasting and optimising statistics on CET
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE STRATEGY
In the now-finalised implementation process, the partners pooled their efforts to address the opportunities and challenges in the CET field defined during the strategy process and to ad-vance joint initiatives. An implementation board with all partners was established in order to coordinate the individual implementation activities and facilitate the networking required. 
As part of four innovation labs and in consultation with other experts, the partners developed specific solutions and recommendations for the following areas: 
•  strategic forecasting and analytical tools
•  literacy and basic skills
•  advisory structures in CET
•  quality assurance in CET
[Page #20]
19
Further, a working group dedicated to the subject of employment conditions for CET staff in publicly  funded  CET  was  set  up. A  workshop  around  digital  learning  infrastructures  and  the opportunities and challenges connected to them through the digital transformation was held.
A Federation-Länder (federal-state government) committee was also established. The overar-ching aims of the committee are to enhance the transfer and exchange of experience and har-monise the various forms of public support for CET.
In the implementation phase, the partners implemented or initiated most of the agreed activi-ties. A selection of highlighted measures and agreements from the now-finalised implementa-tion phase is documented as an overview here.
[Page #21]
20
IMPLEMENTATION CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE NATIONAL SKILLS STRATEGY (SELECTION)
Supporting transparency
•  In December 2020, the project definition phase for NOW!, the planned central entry portal of the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, was initiated by the Federal Employ-ment Agency. Upon completion of the phase, the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and the Federal Employment Agency Administrative Board will decide upon the course of the further implementation process.
•  The INVITE innovation competition supported by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research strengthens the digital CET space via funding projects launched in spring 2021.
•  Establishment of the Federation-Länder Committee for the better harmonisation of 
support measures.
Advancing funding programmes
•  The ‘Work of Tomorrow Act’ (Arbeit-von-morgen-Gesetz) significantly expanded the Fed-eral  Employment  Agency’s  funding  of  qualification  for  reasons  of  structural  change  in order to enhance the employability of labour force participants during the digital transfor-mation. For adults pursuing their first vocational qualification, the law created a right to financial support under specific conditions.
•  By simplifying and enhancing support for CET, among other measures, the Act to Secure Employment (Beschäftigungssicherungsgesetz) was used to increase the incentive to take advantage of periods of short-time work/furlough during the COVID-19 pandemic to pursue CET.
•  Additional incentives for strengthening higher-qualifying vocational education now exist due to an amendment of the Upgrading Training Assistance Act (Aufstiegsfortbildungs-förderungsgesetz) that increased funding rates, grant rates and allowances. 
•  The Länder have expanded regulatory structures and funding for literacy and basic edu-
cation according to need and with sustainability in mind. 
•  Many Länder have advanced their funding programmes for CET, taking the new federal 
funding programmes into consideration.
•  As part of the National Decade for Literacy and Basic Skills (AlphaDekade), the Federal Ministry of Education and Research is funding new development projects from the year 2021 for work-orientated literacy and basic education.
Strengthening advisory services
•  With the projects of the trade unions and chemical industry social partners funded by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research and assisted by CET mentors, in-com-pany implementation structures for the establishment of sustainable educational advice and supervision have been expanded since 2020 in order to raise employee awareness of CET opportunities and motivate them to participate. Some of the Länder are following a similar approach.
[Page #22]
21
•  Regional collaboration among the Federal Employment Agency, the Länder and other 
partners was strengthened and is being developed further in order to enhance the inter-linking of local programmes.
Strengthening the responsibility of the social partners
•  Together with the social partners, the Federal Ministry for Labour and Social Affairs has enhanced the ESF Social Partner Guidelines, and from 2021 to 2027 will fund innovative projects for CET and equal opportunity.
•  The collective bargaining regulations for CET were also developed further (German Federation of Chemical Employers’ Associations (BAVC), IG Bergbau, Chemie, Energie(IG BCE), Federation of German Employers‘ Associations in the Metal and Electrical Engineering Industries and IG Metall, the metalworker’s union). 
Strengthening quality
•  Key improvements in accreditation and approval procedures in employment promotion 
were implemented as part of the ‘Work of Tomorrow Act’. 
Increasing the visibility of skills
•  The social partners, the Federal Ministry of Education and Research, the Association of German Chambers of Industry and Commerce (DIHK) and the German Confederation of Skilled Crafts and Small Businesses (ZDH) have strengthened their auditing of legal and financial conditions so that the process of validation of vocational skills can be continued in the next legislative term and put on a legal footing wherever necessary. 
Developing programmes
•  By 2024, the funding projects launched by the Federal Ministry of Education and 
Research in 2020 as a result of the nationwide competition Zukunft gestalten – Innova-tionen für eine exzellente berufliche Bildung – InnoVET (designing the future – innovations for excellent vocational education – InnoVET) will provide strategic impetus for further job advancement prospects.
Developing institutions further and strengthening regional networking
•  The Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs’ nationwide programme for the funding of more than 40 CET networks was launched in 2020 with the aim of strengthening voca-tional and training opportunities in small and medium-sized enterprises (SME) – also an aim of individual Länder programmes.
Optimising the data situation
•  To better assess CET activities, a project supported by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research was launched to establish transparent, systematic reporting in the field of CET.
Info box 1: Selected contributions to the implementation of the National Skills Strategy
[Page #23]
None
[Page #24]
23
B | Findings from the ten key priority areas
K E Y  P R I O R I T Y A R E A 1
Supporting the transparency of CET opportunities and programmes
CURRENT SITUATION AND OBJECTIVE
The variety that exists in the continuing education and training (CET) field is a foundation and an opportunity for needs-based, individual and lifelong learning. A large number of regional and local stakeholders have taken on responsibility in the field. Many education providers or-ganise CET courses in accordance with a wide range of needs. There are relevant regulations at the federal and state levels, and in collective bargaining agreements as well. The complexity that  goes  hand  in  hand  with  this  diversity  places  special  requirements  on  collaboration  and coordination for all those involved.  
As a result, potential CET participants still too often find it difficult to iden-tify  suitable  CET  programmes  among  the  existing –  increasingly  digital – programmes and to leverage funding opportunities in order to identify and realise their needs and wishes with regard to education. Nor is it always easy for companies to find programmes that are suitable to cover their employ-ees’ need for skills development.37
The variety that exists in the CET field is a foundation and an opportunity for needs-based, individual and lifelong learning.
The  National  Skills  Strategy  partners  have  therefore  identified  two  aims: ‘making it easier for people who are interested in CET, employees and com-pany human resource managers to navigate the CET market effectively and increasing transparency’.38
37 Federal Ministry of Education and Research (2019), p 69, Table 22. Müller, N., Wenzelmann, F. (2020): Berufliche Weiterbildung. Teilnahme und Abstinenz. In: Zeitschrift für Weiterbildungsforschung, No. 43, pp 47–73. DOI: doi.org/10.1007/s40955-019-0141-0
38 Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, Federal Ministry of Education and Research (pub.) (2019): Strategiepapier Nationale Weiterbildungsstrategie, Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, Federal Ministry of Education and Research, Berlin, p 6.
[Page #25]
24
WHAT HAS BEEN ACHIEVED?
The Federation-Länder Committee was established to serve as a new platform for discussing and coordinating CET policy in federal collaboration, facilitating an exchange of experiences and the alignment of funding and advisory measures. 
In order to significantly improve guidance and transparency for potential CET participants and companies, several activities were initiated.
•  In cooperation with Tech4Germany, the Federal Ministry for Labour and Social Affairs cre-ated a user-centric prototype as orientation for the development of a central entry portal for  CET.  Based  on  that,  the  Federal  Employment Agency  was  commissioned  to  examine the establishment and operation of a CET portal as part of the Act to Secure Employment (Beschäftigungssicherungsgesetz). The project definition phase (PDP; NOW! – Nationale On­line Weiterbildungsplattform) adopted by the Federal Employment Agency Administrative Board will end in August 2021. It will integrate existing Federal Employment Agency online products and those of other stakeholders, in particular the existing CET websites and por-tals of the Länder. The effort’s initial focus will be on employees who are potential CET par-ticipants, SME and education providers. When the PDP is finished, the next implementation steps will be decided. The Federal Ministry for Labour and Social Affairs has made up to €30 million available from the federal government’s AI strategy budget for the development of the entry portal.
•  The Federal Ministry of Education and Research published the INVITE (Digital platform for  CET)  innovation  competition  for  designing  an  innovative,  user-centric  and  secure digital education space for work-related CET. The selected projects feature innovative technology and contain promising structural and didactic development approaches to the  networking  and  advancing  of  internet-based  platforms,  applications  and  services (e.g.  search  engines)  and  the  development  of  innovative  digital  teaching  and  learning programmes for work-related CET. The project funding began on 1 March 2021, for a total volume of €88 million.
The INVITE and NOW! projects follow complementary approaches. They both aim to increase transparency and accessibility in CET and are therefore closely coordinated. 
The  Federal  Employment  Agency  already  provides  an  array  of  digital  information  products, including  KURSNET,  Germany’s  largest  database  for  continuing  education  and  training,  and BERUFENET, an online encyclopaedia of occupations. The New Plan online tool, an in-depth platform for inspiring employees to start out on new occupational paths and displaying op-portunities for professional/vocational development, went live at the end of 2020. As part of NOW!, a merger of the above products is being examined. 
The Federal Ministry of Education and Research is funding the hoch&weit project, which is developing an information portal for science-oriented CET (duration: 2020 to 2023). Along-side degree courses, the portal will map shorter CET courses such as certification courses. Its implementation will be closely monitored, among others, by the German Association for University Continuing and Distance Education and coordinated with the portal development of individual Länder. 
[Page #26]
25
The Association of German Chambers of Industry and Commerce and the German Confedera-tion of Skilled Crafts and Small Businesses have agreed to raise awareness of higher-qualifying vocational education (formerly called ‘advanced further training’) for the continuing education certificates in their areas of responsibility and to increase the transparency of career and devel-opment opportunities. With regard to chambers of industry and commerce, various informa-tional events on new certificates of completion in higher-qualifying vocational education have been held, including one about an internet dossier,39 and publications with a focus on successful employment biographies in higher vocational training.40
OUTLOOK
•  To intensify their collaboration in the CET field and strengthen the coherence of the support programmes, the German federal government and Länder are working towards a coordinat-ed procedure, also in the context of ‘CET chains’ (sequences of complementary CET courses) if necessary. The continuation of the Federation-Länder Committee aims to further enhance the  exchange  of  information  and  coordination  among  the  Federal  Ministry  of  Education and Research, the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, the Federal Employment Agency and the Länder with a focus on publicly-funded CET.
39  Association of German Chambers of Industry and Commerce (2021): Berufliche Weiterbildung zahlt sich aus. in: Association of German Chambers of Industry and Commerce. URL: dihk.de/de/themen-und-positionen/fachkraefte/berufliche-weiterbildung-zahlt-sich-aus
40  Association of German Chambers of Industry and Commerce (2020): Top Abschlüsse. Top Perspektiven. Erfolg mit Höherer Berufsbildung. In: Association of German Chambers of Industry and Commerce. URL: dihk-bildung.shop/weiterbildung/informationsmaterialien/hoehere-berufsbildung/
[Page #27]
26
K E Y  P R I O R I T Y A R E A 2
Closing funding gaps, creating new incentives, adapting existing support systems
CURRENT SITUATION AND OBJECTIVE
During the current structural change, the need for investment in CET and skills development has significantly increased. Alongside CET and skills development for unemployed persons, in-dividual CET is growing in importance. As different industries and economic sectors are influ-enced to varying degrees by the emergence and disappearance of jobs due to structural change, the necessity for employed persons to advance their training in their current occupation or to re-orientate  and  change  industries  as  required  is  increasing.  In  addition  to  support  for  em-ployed persons during the transformation, the aim is to more actively promote the participation of low-skilled persons in CET and their acquisition of basic skills. 
The responsibility for satisfying the more complex requirements is shared by  companies,  employees,  social  partners  and  public  authorities. At  the same time, investment in CET is worthwhile for all the stakeholders men-tioned: they can systematically support both the labour market’s adapt-ability  and  resilience  and  economic  innovation  processes,  thereby  safe-guarding employability and competitiveness.
Alongside CET and skills development for unemployed persons, individual CET is growing in importance.
WHAT HAS BEEN ACHIEVED?
Since  2019,  the  Federal  Employment  Agency’s  spectrum  of  tasks  and  level  of  commitment with regard to support for CET based on the Skills Development Opportunities Act (Qualifi­zierungschancengesetz) have significantly increased.41 This law gives employees access to CET support under certain conditions irrespective of age, qualifications and company size.
With the ‘Work of Tomorrow Act’, at the initiative of the Federal Ministry of Labour and So-cial Affairs, CET funding through unemployment insurance for employees was expanded again. Employees and companies with an increased need for CET due to structural change can now be supported to a much greater extent. At the same time, the application process was simpli-fied. The majority of Länder have supplemented the funding channel with their own measures, which are targeted towards funding individual or in-company CET. 
With  the Act  to  Secure  Employment,  support  for  CET  during  periods  of  short-time  work  or furlough was improved. 
At the initiative of the Federal Ministry of Education and Research, the federal government and Länder have perceptibly improved their financial support for persons who look to upgrade their skills through higher qualifying vocational education and expanded the funding options with 
41 German Bundestag (2021): Bericht der Bundesregierung über die Förderung der beruflichen Weiterbildung im Rahmen der aktiven Arbeitsförderung und die entsprechenden Ausgaben. Drucksache 19/25785. In: German Bundestag. URL: dip21.bundestag.de/dip21/btd/19/257/1925785.pdf
[Page #28]
27
the fourth amendment of the Upgrading Training Assistance Act. For example, the contribution to  living  expenses  was  extended  to  equal  a  full  subsidy.  Further,  the  subsidy  component  of course and examination fees was raised to 50 per cent and the loan remission options were sup-plemented. In particular, the amendment supported ‘step-by-step upgrading’ encompassing up to three stages of further training.  
In  order  to  strengthen  the  individual  employability  of  unemployed  persons  and  employees without a formal vocational qualification, the ‘Work of Tomorrow Act’ also implemented a ba-sic legal right to undertake a formal vocational qualification and access the related financial support for this group of persons as long as the qualification improves their individual employ-ability and the probability of completing the qualification. 
‘CET financial bonuses’ will continue to be granted for successful interim and final examina-tions as part of re-training support from the Federal Employment Agency and the job cen-tres.  With  the  extension  of  the  relevant  regulations,  additional  incentives  to  participate  in and complete CET-related vocational qualification will continue to be offered. The encour-agement of persons with low incomes to participate in CET-related vocational qualification measures is an important aim. That is why the funding period for the Federal Ministry of Ed-ucation and Research’s Bildungsprämie (education bonus) support programme was extended for applicants until the end of 2021 and the deadline for the redemption of education bonuses was extended until mid-2022. 
In line with its commitment to review, the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs devel-oped its own conceptual considerations for state-subsidised educational leave and part-time educational leave. These considerations aim to more strongly support individual vocational CET – as preparation for a change in job/sector, for example – in view of the structural changes in the 
[Page #29]
28
labour market. Accordingly, in future the primary need for action will be in areas where people aspire to new individual professional/vocational goals or changes in occupation become neces-sary. As a supplement to vocational CET in accordance with the German Social Code Book III, state-subsidised educational leave or part-time educational leave could expand education-re-lated options for employees and open up an individual pathway to a new occupation with an improved employment outlook or a future-orientated industry. In the process, the significance of entitlements in social insurance schemes during phases of education should be considered. In industries or regions that are widely impacted by structural change, collective rights-based approaches to skills development with prospects via relevant works or collective agreements should also be considered.
An innovation lab was set up to examine the subject area of literacy and the improvement of basic skills.42 The main question was how the existing diverse activities of all stakeholders could be  expanded  and  dovetailed  more  effectively. The  innovation  lab  presented  a  results  report with the following recommendations for action. 
•  In order to improve the basic skills of persons who have fundamental difficulties with read-ing and writing, the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs aims to enable the acqui-sition  of  basic  skills  as  part  of  continuing vocational  education  programmes  that  do  not lead to a formal qualification – for a limited time. It should also be made easier to ‘return-to-learn’ and gain a secondary school education certificate as part of CET supported by the Federal Employment Agency and the job centres. 
42 For a more detailed presentation, see the innovation lab’s ‘Results report’ in the Annex.
[Page #30]
29
•  The Federal Employment Agency and the job centres will continue their support for adults with low literacy, in particular the expansion of learning programmes for adults with low literacy, as part of the labour market policy services. 
•  The Länder are also expanding the subject area through their participation in the Alpha­Dekade by the federal government and the Länder. In many of the Länder, support for and the expansion of basic education centres is a focus. Further, the Länder are concentrating on developing more sustainable structures for increasing literacy through both nationwide coordination and specialist offices and nationwide networks in order to promote commu-nication to adults with low literacy within the partner organisations from the private sector and civil society. 
•  As part of the AlphaDekade, in 2020 the Federal Ministry of Education and Research pub-lished a new announcement on the funding of development projects for work-orientated literacy and basic education. Under the announcement, projects that build upon ongoing projects can also be funded. Further, 14 research projects on adult literacy and basic ed-ucation are being funded under a funding announcement published at the end of 2019. The Federal Ministry of Education and Research is also funding the continued expansion of the German Adult Education Association’s vhs (adult education centre) learning por-tal. In the current funding phase, the new learning field of digital basic education will be established, among others.
OUTLOOK
•  The  awareness  and  take-up  of  the  expanded  funding  opportunities  for  employees  and companies must continue to be improved in collaboration among all partners. Further, and particularly given the ongoing structural change, all CET stakeholders should continually verify the need to further develop the existing support and funding tools and where nec-essary, close any existing funding gaps in a coordinated manner. In the area of individual CET, further effort should be made to more strongly support needs-based, self-determined employment biographies during the structural change in all income and skills categories and  irrespective  of  gender.  In  the  process,  encouraging  employees  to  participate  in  CET measures and the strengthening of individual capabilities will make key contributions to the establishment of a new CET culture.
•  The Länder aim for the needs-oriented, sustainable development of a regulatory structure for  adult  literacy  and  basic  education  and  funding  for  learning  programmes  provided  by adult  education  centres,  basic  education  centres  or  courses. They  aspire  to  enhance  the transparency of existing learning programmes, expand their cooperation at the local and re-gional levels with the federal government as part of its project funding or with Federal Em-ployment Agency courses and institutionalise this cooperation whenever possible through roundtables, for example.
•  In  this  context,  a  joint  working  group  with  representatives  of  the  federal  government (Federal  Ministry  of  Labour  and  Social  Affairs  and  Federal  Ministry  of  Education  and Research),  Länder  (Standing  Conference  of  Education  Ministers),  Federal  Employment Agency, the social partners, practitioners and researchers will examine, based on prac-tical experience, which course models would be expedient for implementation and how projects on literacy and basic education and the existing support instruments of the Fed-eral Employment Agency can be used even more effectively. The working group will also develop recommendations for structural improvements.
[Page #31]
30
The  nationwide  and  regional  networks  of  the  social  partners  and  the  educational  institu-tions they sponsor are indispensable multipliers, particularly for the long-term establishment of  workplace-orientated  basic  education  in  the  company  context.  Company  consultants  and in-company  CET  mentors  could  also  assume  key  roles  here. The  model’s  establishment  and development in the area of work-orientated basic education would therefore require further support. The potential of digital products and programmes should also be tapped.
K E Y  P R I O R I T Y A R E A 3
Ensuring full-coverage lifelong CET guidance and strengthening skills development advisory services, particularly for small and medium-sized enterprises
CURRENT SITUATION AND OBJECTIVE
CET guidance provides important support for decisions on tailored CET and skills develop-ment, as well as professional/vocational upgrading or advancement. As a result, this key pri-ority area is closely connected to the measures set out in key priority area 1 for the improve-ment of transparency. 
The  current  findings  of  the  Adult  Education  Survey  show  that  those  who  take  advantage of advisory services have a higher probability of participating in CET.43 Alongside services for individuals,  skills  development  guidance  for  companies  –  SME  in  particular  –  represents  an effective tool for identifying potential for development and employees’ specific skills devel-opment needs. It safeguards skilled worker potential and helps acquire new participants in the labour force. SMEs often lack strategic personnel planning, which is the basis for skills develop-ment planning. Therefore, skills development guidance can represent a key building block for ensuring that companies are future-proof. 
Due to the significance of advisory services in the CET process, the National Skills Strategy im-plementation phase included an innovation lab on the topic. In focus was the need for stronger regional networking among the various institutions with advisory services. Further, the partic-ipants examined how to establish accessible relevant programmes to enable more people and companies to benefit from CET or skills development guidance.
The continuation of support for KOFA (Kompetenzzentrum für Fachkräftesicherung), the centre of excellence for securing skilled labour funded by the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy, ensures a particular focus on SMEs with regard to communication and support and the continued rollout of best practices. KOFA provides comprehensive information for SMEs as  support  for  the  selection,  planning  and  implementation  of  tailored  measures  for  human resources work. CET plays a key role – due to digitalisation in particular.
43 Federal Ministry of Education and Research (2019), p 40. 
[Page #32]
31
WHAT HAS BEEN ACHIEVED?
In order to systematise and optimise advisory service availability, the existing guidance struc-tures must be more strongly interconnected. In the innovation lab on this topic, the partners committed to establishing and advancing networking at the regional level. The advisory ser-vices of the various stakeholders should not compete, but instead complement each other and interlink efficiently. ‘Conditions for success’ for implementing local partnerships were drawn up during the innovation lab.
The Federal Employment Agency and the Länder established a joint process in which an inventory of regional partnerships was initiated. It will be subse-quently  used  as  a  basis  for  more  effective  knowledge  transfer. The  process also includes the development of recommendations for any regional activities that are required and if necessary, the expansion of partnerships. 
In the innovation lab focused on CET guidance structures, the partners com-mitted to establish-ing and advancing networking at the regional level.
The  implementation  of  Lebensbegleitende  Berufsberatung,  its  lifelong  career guidance  programme,  signified  a  milestone  in  the  development  of  CET  advi-sory services for the Federal Employment Agency. It provides comprehensive advisory services for the unemployed and employees in order to support them with decisions related to their employment path and retention of employability. 
In parallel, the Federal Employment Agency developed the New Plan online self-assessment tool for professional/vocational re-orientation or initial guidance, particularly for those who do not yet have a specific aim in mind. The tool takes previous occupational experience and per-sonal circumstances into consideration. Since December 2020, New Plan has been accessible to users as a pilot version and will be continuously developed until autumn 2022.
With regard to guidance for companies, the Federal Employment Agency has undertaken a con-ceptual revision of the guidance on employee qualifications provided by its Arbeitgeber­Service (service for employers). The Spezialisten für Arbeitsmarktberatung (specialists for labour market guidance) pilot project is aiming for comprehensive, preventive advisory services for employers to safeguard their personnel needs for the long term.
[Page #33]
32
The social partners view strengthening the Federal Employment Agency’s advisory services as part of Lebensbegleitende Berufsberatung and the qualification guidance of the Arbeitgeber­Service as opportunities to enable accessible CET for employees and companies; also in close interplay with company partners. 
The  letter  of  intent  between  the  Federal  Employment Agency  and  chemical  industry  social partner, ‘Zusammenarbeit bei der Weiterbildungs­ und Qualifizierungsberatung von Unterneh­men und Beschäftigten in der Chemischen Industrie’ (collaboration in CET and skills develop-ment guidance among companies and employees in the chemical industry), presents an option for raising the profile of the Federal Employment Agency’s advisory and guidance services and achieving  close  cooperation  among  local  employment  agencies.  A  needs-oriented  advisory service will be developed in three pilot regions. If it is successful, it will be rolled out nation-wide.
The  Chambers  of  Commerce  and  Industry  organisation  has  modernised  and  advanced  its CET guidance programmes and services. It commissioned the creation of easy-to-understand explanatory videos on CET guidance, conducted internal training and exchanges of experience and initiated pilot co-operations for lifelong career guidance between its regional organisa-tions (e.g. Dusseldorf, Leipzig, Regensburg) and regional employment agencies.
The  in-company  CET  mentors  established  in  projects  by  the  unions  IG  Metall,  Vereinte Dienstleistungsgewerkschaft (ver.di), Gewerkschaft Nahrung­Genuss­Gaststätte (NGG) and IG Bergbau,  Chemie,  Energie  (IG  BCE)  have  created  a  new  approach  to  direct  communication with employees to raise their awareness of CET and increase their motivation to participate. If a need for in-depth guidance arises, potential CET participants are referred to the Federal Employment  Agency’s  individual  advisory  services  or  one  of  the  other  available  services, depending  on  the  specific  aim.  Similar  projects  exist  in  individual  Länder  in  collaboration with partners at the regional level. 
OUTLOOK
•  The significance and expansion of face-to-face guidance was named a high priority by the partners as part of the innovation lab. From the viewpoint of all participants, more effort must be made to improve advisory service take-up by low-skilled persons. To do so, it is necessary to improve advisory service accessibility.
•  Outreach work presents an opportunity to point out the benefits and advantages of CET advice to more people. That is why outreach guidance must be more the focus when revis-ing existing concepts or designing new ones. The expansion of the CET mentor approach and similar programmes can play a key role in raising the levels of employee awareness and motivation. 
•  As a supplement to individual communication and in-person individual guidance, online advisory services could contribute to motivating more people to use CET advice overall. Providing advice via digital channels can be considered a supplement to other guidance formats. In the innovation lab, the participants determined a need for further research and development on the opportunities and challenges of online advisory services.
[Page #34]
33
•  In line with a user-focussed multi-channel strategy, classical face-to-face CET guidance should be strengthened alongside new information paths and assessment formats. For ex-ample, the Federal Ministry of Education and Research will expand its Infotelefon Weiter­bildungsberatung (CET hotline) to become a nationwide citizen’s service called ‘Guidance on lifelong learning’. In this context, the NOW! entry portal will contribute to interlinking the various services available. The projects from the INVITE competition will contribute new digital solutions.
[Page #35]
34
K E Y  P R I O R I T Y A R E A  4
Strengthening the responsibility of the social partners
CURRENT SITUATION AND OBJECTIVE
The social partners play a key role in the successful design of the transforma-tion at the company and sector levels. Alongside practice-oriented in-compa-ny skills development measures and the competent, needs-oriented shaping of training and CET regulations as part of regulatory processes, companies’ strategic, proactive personnel planning is becoming increasingly important. It helps to safeguard individual employability in companies and counteract a scarcity of skilled workers in existing or new fields of business while ensuring that companies are future-proof. 
The social partners play a key role in the successful design of the transformation at the company and sector levels.
To strengthen the social partners’ role, the partners have agreed on various measures. They en-compass the continuation and further development of the proven ESF Social Partner Guidelines on CET and equal opportunity in a changing world of work, and the collection of best-practice examples  of  company  and  collectively-agreed  measures  of  continuing  vocational  education and training. In addition, collective bargaining parties such as those in the chemical industry have concluded industry-specific agreements.
WHAT HAS BEEN ACHIEVED?
Given the ongoing digital transformation, the chemical industry social partners aim to pursue collective bargaining agreements specifically with reference to skills development as part of the National Skills Strategy and negotiated a skills development campaign within the framework of the last collective bargaining agreement (November 2019). Alongside an industry-specific CET 
[Page #36]
35
advisory service (pilot phase launch in spring 2021) and the chemical industry-specific adapta-tion of the PYTHIA qualification analysis tool (publication in spring 2021) developed under the umbrella of the New Quality of Work Initiative (INQA), the campaign contains an innovative, AI-supported trend analysis tool focussing on the skills relevant to the industry.44 The metal and electrical industries have concluded company collective bargaining agreements that con-tain binding regulations for managing structural change. These ‘collective agreements for the future’ aim to secure sustainable prospects (safeguarding of employment and location, invest-ments, etc.), innovative skills development pathways, binding skills development processes and tools for the participation of works councils (steering committees, for example). 
In the metal and electrical industries’ 2021 collective bargaining round, the social partners also adopted framework regulations for future collective agreements. The company and collective bargaining parties were able to agree upon regulations for managing the transformation tai-lored to individual companies. Based on analysis of the company situation, agreements around such areas as personnel and skills development planning and employment protection can be made.  
As a follow-up, the Federal Ministry for Labour and Social Affairs is funding an industry-specific adaptation of the PYTHIA qualification analysis tool for the automotive sector in order to sup-port smaller companies with strategic personnel planning and consequently, individual skills development plans. This was resolved as part of the National Platform Future of Mobility.45
Among the partners, there is no consensus on the question of options for the improved par-ticipation of works councils in CET. In order to improve the general right of initiative for works councils with regard to CET, the Federal Ministry for Labour and Social Affairs examined a va-riety of starting points. 
Together with the social partners and the relevant federal government departments and with involvement of the Länder, the Federal Ministry for Labour and Social Affairs further developed the ESF Social Partner Guidelines for reissue as part of the ESF Plus 2021 to 2027 funding peri-od. The aim is to strengthen the social partnership-oriented shaping of the change in the world of work through promoting concepts and measures in four key areas:
1.  promoting CET in times of transformation
2.  shaping equal opportunity
3.  regional networks for strengthening CET and equal opportunity in SMEs
4.  modelling innovative approaches to strengthen CET and equal opportunity.
The programme launch is planned for winter 2021/2022.
44 German Federation of Chemical Employers’ Associations (BAVC), Industriegewerkschaft Bergbau, Chemie, Energie (IG BCE) and HR Forecast (pub.) (2021): An analysis of the skills requirements of the future. The Future Skills Report Chemistry. BAVC, IG BCE, HR Forecast, Munich. In: The Future Skills Report Chemistry. URL: future-skills-chemie.de/en/
45 National Platform Future of Mobility (2020): Working group 4. Securing Germany as a place for mobility, production, battery cell production, primary materials and recycling, training and qualification. Focus Group Strategic Personnel Planning and Development. 1st Interim Report on Strategic Human Resources Planning and Development in the Mobility Sector (German language report) in: National Platform Future of Mobility Berlin. URL: plattform-zukunft-mobilitaet.de/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/NPM-AG-4-1-Zwischenbericht-zur-strategischen-Personalplanung-und-Entwicklung-im-Mobilit%C3%A4tssektor.pdf 
[Page #37]
36
The  Federal  Ministry  of  Education  and  Research  and  trade  unions  have  agreed  to  establish a  new  approach  to  the  activation  of  employee  CET  activities  by  means  of  in-company  CET mentors. Initially, funding projects were launched to qualify works and personnel councils and union workplace representatives as CET mentors in order to reach employees through personal communication and individual mentoring in skills development. The launched projects were in the metal, electrical, automotive and mechanical engineering, healthcare, energy supply and waste disposal industries, insurance, public administration, the food & beverage industry, the hospitality sector and the catering industry.
OUTLOOK
To  improve  the  transparency  of  innovative  approaches  to  company  and  collectively-agreed continuing vocational education and training, the partners have compiled practical examples based on their experiences with the ESF Social Partner Guidelines and the New Quality of Work Initiative. The following approaches in the info box are presented as examples.
There  is  a  need  for  advancement  regarding  the  development  of  tools  for  the  determination of personnel development and CET needs, in particular in the SME area. The PYTHIA project represents a first step that should be used as a basis for advancement.
PROJECT 1: GALA-Q: SOCIAL PARTNER-BASED SKILLS DEVELOPMENT INITIATIVE GARDENING AND LANDSCAPING 
Pillar  I  (systematic  CET): A  CET  initiative  for  long-term  employees  was  developed with the aim of retaining skilled workers. Based on three member company surveys on the need for skills development, training plans leading to the GaLa-Q certificate in gardening and landscaping were developed in collaboration with industry experts. They cover a variety of areas (vegetation area care, leadership and communication in gardening and landscaping, etc.) and target groups (landscape gardeners and skilled workers, for example). 
Pillar II (retention of employee ability to work/occupational health management): Three step-by-step project approaches on occupational health in gardening and land-scaping encompass activities such as a mobile, interactive exhibition format, the de-velopment of measures in a follow-up company workshop and an online course on systematic health.
Safeguarding sustainability: The establishment of systematic, needs-based CET ac-tivity was tested in the project and will be implemented based on the findings of the social partners’ evaluation. The securing of the ‘GaLa-Q’ logo, creation of a certificate and  the  corresponding  examination  regulations  and  a  transparent  product  transfer (education plans) laid the foundation for the industry to carry on the GaLa-Q approach. 
[Page #38]
37
Project sponsor: Internationales Institut für Empirische Sozialökonomie (inifes)
The  project  was  funded  by  the  ESF  and  the  Federal  Ministry  for  Labour  and  Social Affairs within the framework of the ESF social partner guidelines ‘Securing the skilled labour base: vocational training and education (CVET) and gender equality’.
For detailed information, see (in German): galabaucamp.de/projekte/gala-q/
PROJECT 2: ARBEIT UND INNOVATION: KOMPETENZEN STÄRKEN, ZUKUNFT GESTALTEN (A+I)
The  IG  Metall  project  ‘Arbeit+Innovation:  Kompetenzen  stärken,  Zukunft  gestalten’ (Work + innovation: Strengthen skills, design the future) aims to tackle the challenges named in the title. In the first central focus of activity, employees’ skills were devel-oped to qualify them as ‘work 4.0 experts’. This entailed a five-part skills development series with modules of three days per skill. In close collaboration with the Centre of Cooperation  RUB  (Ruhr  University  Bochum)/IGM  (IG  Metall)  and  the  Chair  of  Pro-duction Systems (LPS) at RUB, it was possible to develop the didactic concept of a work-orientated learning factory in the course of the project. The LPS Learning Facto-ry has become a fixed component of skills development. Another focus was the pro-cessing of a company implementation project aimed at supporting the establishment of sustainable personnel development structures. The participating implementation projects received support from an external network of experts.
A  number  of  regional  network  meetings  and  practitioner-scientist  dialogues  have complemented the accompanying support programmes. Since the project launch in February 2016, more than 100 pilot companies nationwide have participated – from medium-sized machine builders to final manufacturers in the automotive sector. Al-most 20 training series with well over 300 participants have taken place.
Project sponsor: IG Metall Executive Board
The  project  was  funded  by  the  ESF  and  the  Federal  Ministry  for  Labour  and  Social Affairs within the framework of the ESF Social Partner Guidelines ‘Securing the skilled labour base: vocational training and education (CVET) and gender equality’.
For detailed information (in German), see: https://www.igmetall.de/innovation
[Page #39]
38
PROJECT 3:  INTERNATIONAL DAY CARE
In the past ten years, the proportion of children under five with a migration history has significantly increased. Day care attendance plays a key role in achieving the aim of fur-thering equal opportunities for all children with regard to education and participation. Given this aim, the scarcity of skilled workers in the industry presents a serious chal-lenge, as educational specialists are a major influence in ensuring the inclusive nature of day care centres. Therefore, one project aim is to absorb the high stress-overload and support skilled workers through personnel development. 
As  skilled  workers  are  in  scarce  supply,  it  is  necessary  to  support  educational  spe-cialists with personnel development before the demands on them become a burden. Personnel development also increases the attractiveness of the employment field. The project supports and develops young talent and improves successful communication to skilled workers through the implementation of support systems. 
A  particular  project  focus  is  safeguarding  sustainability:  practical  concepts,  recom-mendations for action and best practice examples are shared via the social partners. Cross-hierarchical skills development and the in-depth training of multipliers ensure the establishment of a peer support system that extends beyond the conclusion of the project. The establishment of a peer support system also ensures sustainability. 
Project sponsor: Bildungswerk ver.di in Niedersachsen e.V.
The  project  was  funded  by  the  ESF  and  the  Federal  Ministry  for  Labour  and  Social Affairs within the framework of the ESF Social Partner Guidelines ‘Securing the skilled labour base: vocational training and education (CVET) and gender equality’.
For  detailed  information  (in  German),  see:  esf-projekte.de/projekte/projektarchiv/kita-international/
Info box 2 - Project examples from KEY PRIORITY AREA 4 for strengthening the social partners
[Page #40]
39
K E Y  P R I O R I T Y A R E A 5
Reviewing and enhancing the quality and quality assessment of CET programmes and products 
CURRENT SITUATION AND OBJECTIVE
Quality assurance tools are just as diverse as the CET programmes and opportunities they serve. While  publicly  funded  CET  is,  as  a  rule,  linked  to  accreditation  and  certification  regulations, quality assurance in regulated further vocational training takes place either on the basis of the further training regulations negotiated between the federal government and the private sector and social partners or is governed by the legislation of the Länder. In turn, there are hardly any requirements for programmes in the free market, although there are a series of well-established, voluntary quality assurance procedures. For example, according to figures from Weiterbildungs­monitor (CET monitor), the coordination platform for the exchange of information for and about the heterogeneous continuing education and training landscape, around 80 per cent of CET pro-viders in 2017 had at least one quality management system available. As a result of the diversity of CET programmes and courses and the complexity of the CET market, potential CET partic-ipants may have difficulty finding a CET course that is suitable and fits their individual needs. 
WHAT HAS BEEN ACHIEVED? 
To achieve the set objectives, the partners followed various approaches aimed at strengthening the quality and quality assessment of CET programmes.
In order to make the quality of the CET available in the free market more visible and trans-parent for users, the partners took stock of the established approaches to quality assurance as part of an innovation lab. They discussed with representatives of education associations 
[Page #41]
40
whether and which (additional) tools could contribute towards an improvement in the current situation. Their discussions and analyses in the course of four meetings yielded recommen-dations for making quality visible at the structural, provider and demand levels. (For detailed findings, see the accompanying publication on the innovation labs: 4 Quality Assurance).
The quality of CET measures in the area of social benefit support and activation measures in accordance with Books II and III of the Social Code is assured by the Regulation on the Accreditation and Approval for Employment Promotion (Akkreditierungs­ und Zulassungsver­fahren Arbeitsförderung). An evaluation of the procedure in 2019 determined the existence of a quality-promoting effect but also saw the need for adaptation and further development. In view of the findings and with inclusion of the social partners and numerous associations, key improvements were implemented with the adoption of the Gesetz zur Förderung der beruf­lichen Weiterbildung im Strukturwandel und zur Weiterentwicklung der Ausbildungsförderung (law on the promotion of further training in times of structural change and further develop-ment of the promotion of initial vocational training – see ‘Work of Tomorrow Act’) in summer 2020. For example, the reimbursable unit costs for CET measures were significantly increased and made more flexible. In particular, this included an across-the-board increase in the na-tional average unit costs of 20 per cent on 1 July 2020.  Further, if special expenses exist, higher unit costs of up to 25 per cent (e.g. for improvements in accessibility) can be recognised by certification agencies.
CHANGES IN THE REGULATORY STRUCTURE OF THE REGULATION  ON THE ACCREDITATION AND APPROVAL FOR EMPLOYMENT PROMOTION  THROUGH THE ‘WORK OF TOMORROW ACT’
01 July 2020
•  one-off 20 per cent increase in the national average unit costs for CET measures.
01 October 2020
•  biennial (instead of annual) determination and publication of the national average unit costs  
(from 2022)
•  Federal Employment Agency can take the general price or wage trend into consideration when  determining the national average unit costs in the field of vocational adult education in future
•  ‘excess range’ of 25 per cent for national average unit costs upon approval by the competent body. Greater than 25 per cent cost approval by the Federal Employment Agency still required. Any neces-sary and extraordinary expenditures must be traceable und accounted for in cases of an overrun of the national average unit costs
•  basic group size of 12 participants.
Info box 3: ‘Work of Tomorrow Act’
[Page #42]
41
The quality of CET qualifications issued by vocational schools is ensured by the quality man-agement and quality development systems established in the Länder. These systems are perma-nently and successively adapted and expanded. The Ländervereinbarung über die gemeinsame Grundstruktur des Schulwesens und die gesamtstaatliche Verantwortung der Länder in zentralen bildungspolitischen Fragen, an agreement about the common basic structure of the school sys-tem and the overall responsibility of the Länder with regard to primary education policy issues, was concluded on 15 October 2020. In the context of this political project, the Länder agreed to develop a comprehensive quality standard in the field of vocational education that would certify that vocational schools comply with high quality standards.46 It encompasses technical college degrees and supplementary programmes around higher, further and CET qualifications.
The implementation of provider evaluation in the context of CET voucher-based measures by the Federal Employment Agency aims for greater transparency with regard to the quality of ed-ucation providers in the area of support for CET. The rating tool focuses on creating incentives for education providers to increase the quality of their measures. It can contribute to enabling potential participants to compare the education programmes of different providers.
With regard to provider management obtained through procurement, assessment of contract execution by the purchaser of labour market services (the Employment Agency or jobcentres) has been and will continue to be integrated into the procurement decision for all rated standard products. In 2021, the measures for activation and job integration at a provider in accordance with Section 45 Book III of the Social Code and Section 16 Paragraph 1 Book II of the Social Code in conjunction with Section 45 Book III of the Social Code will be a particular focus.
OUTLOOK
•  The experts in the National Skills Strategy innovation lab recommended the creation of an overview of quality-assuring structures, the development of a digital checklist and the analysis of existing quality assurance tools for digital education programmes and, based on this, the development of additional, necessary quality indicators as required, among other recommendations.
•  In order to improve the transparency of the quality-assuring procedure for users, the 
development of digital and responsive checklists that can lead to decision-making should be supported along with other measures. 
•  As part of quality development in CET, digitalisation and the use of new teaching/learning technologies are key tasks with regard to resources, teaching design and instructor competency.
•  Future developments or further developments of platforms or databases must take the aspects of information processing and transparency from the user perspective into con-sideration.  Aspects  such  as  learning  prerequisites,  learning  conditions,  new  teaching/learning technologies and formats and valid learning achievement documentation play important roles here.
46 Standing Conference of Education Ministers (2020): Ländervereinbarung über die gemeinsame Grundstruktur des Schulwesens  und die gesamtstaatliche Verantwortung der Länder in zentralen bildungspolitischen Fragen. Beschluss der Kultusministerkonferenz vom 15.10.2020. In: Standing Conference of Education Ministers URL: kmk.org/fileadmin/Dateien/veroeffentlichungen_beschluesse/2020/2020_10_15-Laendervereinbarung.pdf
[Page #43]
42
K E Y  P R I O R I T Y A R E A 6
Increasing the visibility of and recognising the skills acquired by workers through vocational education and training
CURRENT SITUATION AND OBJECTIVE
In Germany, more than three million members of the workforce in employment subject to so-cial insurance contributions are not in possession of a vocational education qualification.47 The job-related skills they have acquired while employed and through non-formal CET measures are insufficiently documented, as a rule. This makes occupational advancement and participation in society more difficult for them. Likewise, skilled and unskilled workers with a migration history may have difficulties finding employment if they have occupational skills that were acquired outside the German vocational training system, thus lacking the formal vocational qualification required in Germany. The procedure for vocational qualification recognition in accordance with the  Act  on  the  Recognition  of  Professional  Qualifications  (Berufsqualifikationsfeststellungs­gesetz) or the relevant sectoral laws is not open to such persons either. There is the possibility of participating in a final training examination (‘external examination’) – even without previous training. No other tools for assessing and certifying informally or non-for-mally acquired vocational skills in accordance with a uniform nationwide procedure are embedded in the regulatory framework. 
To enable fair opportunities for participation, the National Skills Strategy has set itself the target of improving the usability of informal vocational learning.
To enable fair opportunities for participation and, at the same time, meet the demand for skilled workers, the National Skills Strategy has set itself the  target  of  improving  the visibility  and  usability  of  informal vocation-al  learning  through  standardised  validation  procedures,  without  the  re-placement or weakening of established training systems. This includes the related  opportunities  for  expanding vocational  skills  and  CET.  It  further aspires to roll out proven validation procedures and establish centres of excellence. 
WHAT HAS BEEN ACHIEVED?
The  ValiKom-Transfer  initiative  developed  a  standardised  validation  procedure  (‘ValiKom’ stands for the qualification-related validation of non-formally and informally acquired skills). To implement the ValiKom procedure, the Federal Ministry of Education and Research and its partners, the German Confederation of Skilled Crafts and Small Businesses and the Association of German Chambers of Industry and Commerce, have established centres of excellence at the chambers  of  commerce  and  trades  where  qualification-related validation  procedures  can  be carried out for selected vocations. By October 2021, 11 chambers of trade, 17 chambers of in-dustry and commerce and two chambers of agriculture will offer validation procedures for over 30 vocations in the dual system of occupational training.
47 Own calculation based on statistics from the Federal Employment Agency (2020): Länderreport über Beschäftigte. Deutschland, West/Ost und Länder. Federal Employment Agency, Nuremberg.  
[Page #44]
43
The Federal Employment Agency’s ‘MYSKILLS – Berufliche Kompetenzen erkennen’ pilot pro-cedure identifies practical vocational knowledge in 30 selected vocations in a video- and im-age-supported procedure. The procedure is primarily targeted at Federal Employment Agen-cy clients with the aim of making non-formally and informally acquired knowledge visible in job-specific situations and to consider it in the further employment guidance process. In order to  support  employment  guidance,  job  placement,  activation  and  CET  measures  provided  by employment agencies and job centres, MYSKILLS is now available in 12 languages and thus also accessible to people with migration histories and low German proficiency – two groups significantly overrepresented in underemployment and low-skilled employment. 
5
28
Full equality
Painter and varnisher
Partial equality
23
11
No equality
Chef
26
9
Sales assistant
12
21
4
Electronics technician
17
23
Skilled worker in warehouse logistics
6
36
Skilled worker in metal technology
40
20
Warehouse clerk
62
6
Machine and plant operator
23
8
56
Hairdresser
29
104
Office manager
Figure 1: Top 10 vocations based on 787 validation procedures completed as part of ValiKom between 
November 2018 and February 202148
48  West German Association of German Chambers of Industry and Commerce (2021): Projectcoordination VallKom-Transfer.  Federal Ministry of Education and Research.
[Page #45]
44
OUTLOOK
•  Based  on  findings  from  ValiKom  and  ValiKom-Transfer,  the  Federal  Ministry  of  Educa-tion and Research is examining the options and opportunities of codifying the validation procedure  nationwide  on  a  binding  basis,  and  as  a  next  step  has  held  initial  exploratory talks  with  the  social  partners,  Länder  and  two  umbrella  associations:  the  Association  of German  Chambers  of  Industry  and  Commerce  and  the  German  Confederation  of  Skilled Crafts and Small Businesses. Irrespective of the question of whether or not to write this into law, the Federal Ministry of Education and Research intends to continue on with the previously established structures and is currently examining options for funding the existing ValiKom-Transfer network beyond October 2021. 
•  The prerequisites for the implementation of a legal basis for the validation of informally and non-formally acquired job-specific skills of persons with work experience should be clarified in the German Bundestag’s next legislative period. 
•  Together,  the  federal  government,  Länder,  social  partners,  Federal  Employment  Agency and chamber organisations must ensure that parallel structures to existing and established qualifications-related vocational training systems are not created (considering the valida-tion processes that are likely to be established on a nationwide basis in future).
•  In this respect, whether and how additional vocational and sectoral areas [above and be-yond  the vocations  regulated  by  the Vocational Training Act  or  Crafts  Code  (Handwerks­ordnung)] could be included in a uniform framework should also be examined.
•  The Federal Ministry for Labour and Social Affairs has agreed to the implementation of a research project by the Institute for Employment Research (period: 2021 to 2024) on the use and need for skills determination procedures in the labour administration (jobcentres and employment agencies).
•  Cross-reference: From the perspective of people without usable formal vocational qualifi-cation or without any at all, a process description should be developed in which a pathway to external examination and therefore, a second chance to acquire a vocational qualification can also be opened up. It should be based on advisory services and validation of informally and non-formally acquired vocational skills, as well as supplementary skills development qualifications  if  necessary  –  in  the  form  of  partial  qualifications  or  adjustment  training measures. Supplementary skills development qualifications and courses should be imple-mented nationwide, in particular for persons who, after a validation procedure, have still not achieved full comparability with recognised qualifications. 
•  Cross-reference: The partners should discuss how relationships between validation, recog-nition procedures for foreign qualifications, CET advisory services and skills development qualifications (second-chance, updating, compensatory and supplementary) can be identi-fied and how a consistent framework can be developed in the interest of users.
[Page #46]
45
K E Y  P R I O R I T Y A R E A 7
Advancing further training qualifications and CET programmes
CURRENT SITUATION AND OBJECTIVE
The increasing digitalisation of the world of work and structural change are altering many job profiles and skills requirements. One aim of the National Skills Strategy is to support the ad-vancement of further training and CET programmes to reflect changing skills requirements. 
As part of this objective, the partners will continue the needs-based devel-opment  of  uniform,  nationwide  skills  profiles  in  line  with  their  respective areas  of  responsibility  and  systematically  advance  the  opportunities  for qualification-related skills development programmes. This could be in the form  of  partial  qualification  or  further  adjustment  training  measures  and qualifications,  for  example.  Companies’  need  for  qualified  skilled  workers and employees’ individual career development indicate the direction the de-velopment should take. 
Structural change and the increasing digitalisation of the world of work are altering many job profiles and skills requirements.
WHAT HAS BEEN ACHIEVED?
The amendment of the Vocational Training Act that took effect on 1 January 2020 established the use of the new qualification designations ‘Master Professional’, ‘Bachelor Professional’ and ‘Certified Professional Specialist’. These further training levels enshrined in law were created with the aim of increasing the transparency of vocational career and development opportuni-ties. With the ‘Master Professional Business Administrator’ and ‘Master Professional Restorer in  the Trades’  designations  in  accordance  with  the  German Vocational Training Act,  the  first business- related and trades-related/technical master professional qualifications were respec-tively  introduced.  At  the  same  time,  seven  bachelor  professional  qualifications  were  estab-lished, including ‘Bachelor Professional in Procurement’. Since 1 January 2020, the chambers of trade have presented a master craftsman certificate to more than 20,000 master craftsmen and women. They and all the other graduates who obtained a qualification as master craftsman in the past are now permitted to use the supplementary designation of bachelor professional for the relevant trade. Existing further training qualifications in accordance with the Vocational Training Act are not included in the retroactive effect.
With a focus on the changing world of work, the responsible federal ministries are collabo-rating with the private sector and social partners to verify that further training certificates and  master  examination  regulations  are  up  to  date  and  amended  accordingly.  The  Federal Institute for Vocational Education and Training or the Forschungsinstitut für Berufsbildung im Handwerk research institute at the University of Cologne will monitor the process. Examples of the sectors with modernised qualifications that went into effect in 2019 and 2020 include the media and event sector (Bachelor Professional in Media, Bachelor Professional Industrial Master with a specialty in print media, Bachelor Professional in Event Technology), further training to become a Master Professional Restorer in the Trades and the bachelor professional certificates in the crafts of building brass instruments, bodywork and automotive construc-tion, or laying parquet flooring.
[Page #47]
46
IG Metall, the Federation of German Employers’ Associations in the Metal and Electrical Engi-neering Industries, VDMA – the voice of mechanical engineering in Germany and Europe, the German Electrical and Electronic Manufacturers’ Association and others have created success-ful qualification standards for ‘Industry 4.0’ via the agreed social partner monitoring system and are currently designing a career development concept for higher qualifying vocational educa-tion in the industry. 
The  Standing  Conference  of  Education  Ministers  (KMK)  is  driving  the  innovative  adaptation and advancement of CET at technical colleges with the development of a uniform, nationwide qualification profile. It addresses the skills needs and changes in work, business and production process  that  have  emerged  with  digitalisation. Tailored  integration  into  the  respective  disci-plines and their areas of concentration occurs at various levels. Relevant qualification profiles have been published for the ‘Industry 4.0’ and ‘Business 4.0’ subject areas. A current focus of examination is which specialisms (e.g. agriculture and design) require additional qualification profiles and whether or not these can be implemented.
Figure 2: The Standing Conference of Education Ministers qualification profile for ‘Business 4.0’49
49  Standing Conference of Education Ministers (2019): Kompetenzorientiertes Qualifikationsprofil zur Integration der Thematik „Wirtschaft 4.0“ in die Ausbildung an Fachschulen für Wirtschaft. Beschluss der Kultusministerkonferenz vom 13.12.2019. Berlin, p 2. 
[Page #48]
47
With the aim of increasing the appeal, quality and equivalence of vocational education, since autumn 2020 structural concepts have been developed as part of InnoVET, a nationwide com-petition supported by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research. In ‘innovation clusters’ that map an interplay of regional and industry-specific stakeholders, 17 cooperative projects are working to create appealing skills development programmes for young people to pursue vocational training or further training. For example, the occupational profiles of the agricultural and construction machine sector were modernised with a revised career concept and ongoing career monitoring as part of the LBT (LandBauTechnik) Forward project.50
In partnership with the Association of German Chambers of Industry and Commerce and the Confederation of German Employers’ Associations, the Federal Ministry of Education and Re-search is funding the quality-assured development of partial qualifications for second-chance qualifications. The aim is to implement them in high-demand professions while applying na-tionwide  standards.  The  previous  development  work  of  the  Federal  Institute  for  Vocational Education and Training and the Federal Employment Agency also serve as a basis which will be continued and supplemented according to need. The aim of partial qualification programmes is to support persons with low formal qualifications, including employees without a vocational qualification but with professional work experience, by way of attaining a second-chance vo-cational qualification step by step. Younger persons (up to age 25) will remain the target group for dual vocational training. Individual partners have examined various measures and initiated projects that are still in the implementation phase. In the projects ‘Chancen Nutzen! Mit Teil­qualifikationen Richtung Berufsabschluss’ (Seize the opportunity! Partial qualifications leading to vocational qualification) (Association of German Chambers of Industry and Commerce) and ‘ETAPP – mit Teilqualifizierung zum Berufsabschluss’ (ETAPP – with partial qualification to vo-cational qualification) (Confederation of German Employers’ Associations), standardised, qual-ity-assured bases for second-chance vocational qualification through partial qualifications are being developed in partnership with the ‘BIBB-TQ’ (Federal Institute for Vocational Education and  Training-Partial  qualifications)  (Federal  Institute  for  Vocational  Education  and  Training) project.
The  Federal  Ministry  for  Labour  and  Social Affairs  has  continuously  expanded  the  individu-al financial support and activation measures for CET-related formal vocational qualifications, which also benefit participants in partial qualification programmes. For example, the Federal Employment Agency can support the acquisition of basic skills as part of a formal qualification degree. To strengthen their motivation and stamina, participants receive a CET bonus of €1,500 if  they  successfully  complete  the  external  examination  after  completing  partial  qualification programmes. Further, in 2020 a basic right to receive funding for a CET-related formal qualifi-cation was added to the employment promotion measures for low-skilled persons.
OUTLOOK
•  The social partners are advancing the metal, electrical and mechatronics industrial master further training programmes to form a career concept based on higher qualifying vocational education. Further training certificates at the professional specialist, bachelor professional and master professional levels are being developed. A career concept is also being initiated for the industry-orientated commercial field.
50 Federal Ministry of Education and Research (2020): InnoVet. In: Federal Ministry of Education and Research, Innovet.  URL: inno-vet.de/de/lbt-forward.html
[Page #49]
48
•  Support  for  second-chance  qualification  in  the  form  of  partial  qualification  programmes should be closely tied to the aim of acquiring a formal CET qualification. In the labour mar-ket, a formal qualification is a key prerequisite for long-term employment.
•  The aim is to develop a uniform, nationwide, standardised structure for the needs-based development of partial qualifications based on training regulations. As part of the ‘ETAPP – mit Teilqualifizierung zum Berufsabschluss’ project, which has collaborated with the ‘Chan­cen Nutzen!’ (DIHK Service GmbH) and ‘BIBB-TQ’ (Federal Institute for Vocational Educa-tion and Training) projects funded by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research on a cross-project basis since December 2020, the Federal Ministry of Education and Research will further the process through the joint Advisory Council,51 whose membership includes partners of the National Skills Strategy. The aim is to create greater flexibility in terms of time and space with transparent partial qualification programmes that include the option of vocational qualification.
•  Identification  and,  where  necessary,  removal  of  obstacles  to  obtaining  recognised  voca-tional qualification through certified partial qualification with the involvement of Federal Institute for Vocational Education and Training Board’s recommendations.
•  The Federal Ministry for Labour and Social Affairs will examine whether additional financial incentives for second-chance vocational qualification (as part of funding for CET overall) can be enabled under funding law. The aim remains to increase the motivation and stamina of particularly relevant participant groups.
•  The Federal Employment Agency will intensify its activities in the areas of financial support and the provision of guidance to low-skilled persons with a focus on the attainment of a second-chance formal qualification and, with regard to the participants in partial qualifi-cation, improve its orientation towards the objective of acquiring a formal qualification.
K E Y  P R I O R I T Y A R E A 8
Strategically advancing educational institutions as centres of excellence for CET
CURRENT SITUATION AND OBJECTIVE
In Germany, CET is diverse and often organised at the regional level. Companies, public and private  institutions  and  other  responsible  bodies  offer  a  wide  range  of  programmes.  At  the same time, there are many funding tools orientated to different target groups. This makes it possible to provide CET programmes for persons in different life circumstances and react flex-ibly to changing requirements. To continue to increase the system’s permeability and strength-en synergies, vocational and general education should be further developed together and, to the extent possible, the various CET programmes should be coordinated and interlinked even 
51 The members of the Advisory Council of the partial qualification projects are the Federal Ministry of Education and Research, Federal Ministry for Labour and Social Affairs, Federal Institute for Vocational Education and Training, Federal Employment Agency, Association of German Chambers of Industry and Commerce, Confederation of German Employers’ Associations, Forschungsinstitut Betriebliche Bildung (f-bb), Chambers of Commerce and Industry Arnsberg, Bertelsmann Foundation and AgenturQ.
[Page #50]
49
1
2
1
1
1
4
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
3
4
Figure 3: Funded projects for places of learning partnerships as part of the federal programme establishing CET networks (Version: May 2021)
[Page #51]
50
more closely. To accomplish this, networks among the CET stakeholders must become stronger. With models of partnerships between places of learning and regional CET networks, large and smaller companies can collaborate even more closely as a means of creating synergies in the organisation and implementation of CET measures together.
WHAT HAS BEEN ACHIEVED?
In  some  Länder,  a  successful  system  of  skills  development  networks  has  been  established. Beyond that, with the ‘Aufbau von Weiterbildungsverbünden’ (development of CET networks) federal programme, the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs is implementing one of its commitments in the National Skills Strategy. With the help of regional coordination offices, the programme will establish partnership and networking structures between companies and educational and advisory organisations in order to increase the CET participation of employees (particularly in SME) and strengthen regional economic and innovation networks, among other aims. Due to high demand, around 40 projects instead of the initially planned 10 will be funded as part of the programme. The first two CET networks started in Berlin and Thuringia in De-cember 2020. A second funding guideline to enable support for additional CET networks and a coordination office is also being prepared for publication. Based on a resolution of Concerted Action Mobility in November 2020, there should be a stronger focus on a concept of transfor-mation that takes the qualification of automotive industry employees in other industries and sectors into consideration.
Central  public  or  publicly-funded  institutions  such  as  the  Federal  Employment  Agency,  in-ter-company training centres and vocational schools and adult education centres exercise an important coordination function at the regional level. With regard to support for digitalisation in vocational education, the special programmes of the Federal Ministry of Education and Re-search  and  the  Federal  Ministry  for  Economic Affairs  and  Energy  for  inter-company  training centre digitalisation are particularly significant.
As  part  of  the  Digitale Ausstattung  (digital  equipment)  special  programme  designed  to  ben-efit medium-sized further training and CET institutions in Germany, the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy has funded the procurement of state-of-the-art equipment since 2019. With 90 per cent funding and an individual contribution of only ten per cent, the funding rate here is so high that all educational institutions are able to procure the (sometimes very expensive) equipment. 
OUTLOOK
With the implementation of the National Skills Strategy, additional activities around strength-ening education providers were initiated. The factors of stakeholder networking and collabora-tion have increasingly gained importance.
•  As part of the establishment of new regional networks, good interplay among public-
ly-funded initiatives must be ensured. 
•  Cross-reference: The more efficient interlinking of CET programmes among companies could be pursued in order to leverage synergies and experience. Small companies could benefit from closer collaboration with larger companies.
[Page #52]
51
K E Y  P R I O R I T Y A R E A 9
Strengthening CET personnel and equipping them with the skills required for the digital transformation
CURRENT SITUATION AND OBJECTIVE
Digitalisation  processes  are  leading  to  new  job  descriptions  and  needs  for  skills  and  skilled workers in industries and companies. At the same time, they present growing challenges to ed-ucation providers and institutions and their personnel. Teaching and learning processes should be designed with the help of modern information and communication technologies, and suit-able CET programmes  must  be developed, tested and offered. Therefore, the  National Skills Strategy is pursuing the aim of supporting personnel in CET as they cope with these require-ments. In this context, the partners examined the working and employment conditions of CET personnel  in  publicly-financed vocational  CET  and  made  recommendations  with  a  focus  on requirements-based skills development in particular. 
[Page #53]
52
WHAT HAS BEEN ACHIEVED?
In collaboration with the social partners, a working group from the federal government and Länder examined the working and employment conditions of personnel in publicly funded vo-cational CET. The following focal areas were specified in the process:
•  stocktaking/transparency of the working and employment conditions of personnel in 
publicly-funded vocational CET
•  stocktaking of measures/programmes and activities for skills development and qualifica-
tion of CET personnel
The partners are tracking the following measures in order to continue improving the employ-ment conditions of CET personnel and create new skills development programmes. 
With its Qualifizierungsinitiative Digitaler Wandel – Q 4.0 skills development initiative around the digital transformation, the Federal Ministry of Education and Research is funding the de-velopment and testing of CET concepts for vocational education personnel in the digital age in collaboration with the Federal Institute for Vocational Education and Training and industry partners – initially, until the end of 2022. In the process, digital learning management systems that simplify the nationwide transfer of skills development formats are being established. In MIKA (media and IT competency for training personnel) seminars, participants learn and test how they can use digital media efficiently and profitably in intra-company teaching and learn-ing processes. In addition, the Federal Ministry of Education and Research is funding the na-tionwide Netzwerk Q 4.0 network that focusses on skills development to adapt training to the digital transformation. In collaboration with the German Economic Institute and businesses’ educational organisations, industry- and region-specific CET modules are being developed and tested. The initial findings of the Netzwerk Q 4.0 project work are to be presented to the expert public in June 2021 as part of a mid-term conference.
Skills development for instructors is a key point. Under the direction of the Länder, a working group from the Advisory Board of the AlphaDekade submitted new ‘recommendations for ac-tion for the training and continuing education of instructors in literacy and basic education’. The Standing Conference of Education Ministers and Advisory Board adopted them. They for-mulate non-binding, cross-Länder criteria for the future training and continuing education of instructors. CET will be organised for instructors in almost all Länder. There is strong demand for online further training (webinars) for instructors offered by basic education centres or state-run CET organisations.
With the aim of strengthening sustainable management through CET and skills development for skilled workers and trainers (also in the context of digitalisation), the Federal Ministry of Edu cation  and  Research  drafted  the  BBNE-Transfer  2020-2022  funding  guidelines  in  spring 2020 (BBNE = vocational education for sustainable development). The guidelines contribute to the dissemination and consolidation of successful, sustainability-related further training con-cepts for in-company training personnel that were developed in the BBNE 2015–2019 funding focal area, which focused on sustainable skills development with the aim of shaping chang-ing work processes. Since November 2020, the sustainability-related further education of in- company training personnel has been funded in the form of seven pilot projects.
[Page #54]
53
OUTLOOK
•  Given the insufficiency of the data available as determined by the participants, the National Skills  Strategy  working  group  welcomed  the  iWBBe  project  on  integrated  CET  reporting (‘Integrierte  Weiterbildungsberichterstattung  –  Aufbau  einer  systematischen  Berichterstat­tung zur beruflichen Weiterbildung’) organised by the German Institute for Adult Education in cooperation with the Federal Institute for Vocational Education and Training and funded by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research. 
•  The working group recommended taking stock of the CET measures funded by the Federa-tion and the Länder with a focus on the issue of which tools are considered when assessing the qualification of the personnel when making funding, eligibility or award decisions.
•  The  working  group  recommended  increasing  transparency,  discussion  and  stakeholder communication in the area of labour market policy measures as formulated in point seven of the Advisory Council statement in accordance with Section 182 Book III of the Social Code  (AZAV Advisory  Council, AZAV  =  Regulation  on  the Accreditation  and Approval  for Employment  Promotion)  on  the  evaluation  of  the  procedure  for  accrediting  competent bodies and the approval of providers and measures for employment promotion in accord-ance with Book III of the Social Code.52 That would contribute to more effective leveraging of the existing scope of action in the area of working and employment conditions as part of the accreditation process with regard to activation measures. 
•  The Standing Conference of Education Ministers of the Länder is examining the creation of  recommendations  for  action  aimed  at  strengthening  the  digital  skills  of  personnel  in publicly funded CET.
•  The Länder are working to enable basic education centres to offer online-supported fur-ther training for instructors, among other goals. The ‘recommendations for action for the training and continuing education of instructors in literacy and basic education’ adopted together with the Advisory Board of the AlphaDekade are an important basis that will be monitored by the institutions, their sponsors, CET associations and the Länder. The aim is  to  satisfy  quality  requirements  that  prove  challenging  in  light  of  the  high  degree  of course heterogeneity.
•  It  has  become  obvious  that  a  tool  is  needed  in  order  to  identify  good  practice  with regard to digital skills in the teaching and learning context, discuss it and create trans-parency. Further, it was deemed necessary to continue the discussion process in what-ever form possible. This should also include the lessons learned from dealing with the COVID-19 pandemic.
52 Zenzen, J., Patuzzi, M. (2019): Stellungnahme des AZAV-Beirats zur AZAV-Evaluation, 10. Oktober 2019.  In: Federal Employment Agency. URL: www.arbeitsagentur.de/datei/ba900145.pdf
[Page #55]
54
K E Y  P R I O R I T Y A R E A 10
Strengthening strategic forecasting and optimising CET statistics
CURRENT SITUATION AND OBJECTIVE
Under  the  influence  of  megatrends  in  the  labour  market  that  affect  regions  and  industries  differently  and  bring  changes  in  occupational  profiles  and  competency  requirements  with them, the need for CET guidance for various target groups is growing.
The identification and analysis of occupational and qualification profiles in a changing world of work is essential for developing and providing the pro-active, precautionary qualification of employees and job seekers for future skills needs. In the strategy paper published in 2019, the partners stated the  goals  of  improving  statistical  reporting,  further  developing  tools  for strategic forecasting and improving information paths – in particular, those directed towards SMEs.
The identification and analysis of occupational and qualification profiles in a changing world of work is essential.
WHAT HAS BEEN ACHIEVED?
To tackle the key priority area’s aims, a participatory process was initiated as part of the inno-vation lab. A broad alliance of partners and other institutions formed to engage with the aims.
With regard to the findings’ practical usability, the following higher-level question was iden-tified: Which tools are appropriate for which target groups and what purposes? The prerequi-site for offering target-orientated, relevant CET programmes is the identification of suitable tools for the analysis and identification of existing skills and those needed in future. The tools must be suitable for further development as required. The participants agreed on the follow-ing milestones:
•  stocktaking of existing research and analytical tools in order to establish transparency
•  systematisation and use of synergies among the numerous projects 
•  improvement of information paths (enhancement of their target group/user orientation), 
in particular those directed towards SMEs.
The following findings were compiled: Stocktaking in the group of partners showed that the examples  of  strategic  forecasting  and  analytical  tools  at  different  levels  of  abstraction  are an important basis for the orientation of CET in Germany. For the creation of tailored pro-grammes and support options, the target groups’ specific orientation and need for informa-tion with regard to qualification and skills must be determined. Examples were identified for the  main  target  groups:  federal  and  Länder  authorities,  private  sector  and  social  partners, company human resource managers, works councils, CET/service providers and individuals (employees/job seekers). 
[Page #56]
55
One of the basic challenges is to improve the information channels between researchers and practitioners: each target group has specific needs to be met. To make the findings usable in practice for the target groups, the information channels must be systematised. Exemplary tar-get  group-specific  formats  and  products  for  reaching  individual  targets  groups  were  devel-oped. Further, the following cross-target group recommendations were identified. 
•  The analytical tools should be embedded in the existing ecosystem. In this way, the link to existing regional and industry-specific network and advisory structures or those in the process of being established, such as regional CET networks, ‘centres for the future’ and in-company mentoring programmes or CET advice services, would be strengthened. Specif-ic needs should be reflected back to the researchers. 
•  For SMEs and (interested) individuals in particular, products and formats with low-thresh-old access are needed. In conjunction, the tools’ benefits for the target group should also be made more visible. For example, information campaigns with success stories could be developed as a support function and more incentive mechanisms regarding the use of the information could be created.
•  In line with improving guidance and providing a clear overview of the tools, there will be an assessment around the possible creation of a ‘one-stop shopping’ website on which the findings will be target group-compatible. In the process, a connection to other online programmes should be considered.
To better assess CET trends, the German Institute for Adult Education is funding a joint project by  the  Federal  Institute  for Vocational  Education  and Training  and  the  German  Institute  for Adult Education for the development of integrated CET statistics. The project will be imple-mented in close coordination with the Länder and other relevant statistical stakeholders. The first expert discussion took place in January 2021.
[Page #57]
56
OUTLOOK
•   The partners are working to improve the communication of information from researchers to practitioners and vice versa in order to support better usability and use of the findings for various target groups and in particular for SMEs. In line with this, their recommendation was to continue the discussion on how the findings of the analytical tools can be prepared for target group-specific use. The solution should be based on established exchange struc-tures. In this context, the diverse existing partnerships among scientific institutions were highlighted.
•   The participants recommended the continued, more intensive use of in-novative methods (artificial intelligence, data mining and big data) in the development of analytical tools.
The partners are working to improve communication from researchers to practitioners and vice versa.
•  Accordingly, the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs will further develop  the  skilled  labour  monitoring  tool  and  continue  to  improve  the surveying  of  future  skills  need  in  the  context  of  the ‘Skills  Compass’  re-search project.
•  The Federal Institute for Vocational Education and Training is assessing the option of de-veloping  a  systematic  monitoring  process  with  reference  to  the  changes  relevant  to  the regulatory issues of vocational education (through the closer interlinking of relevant tools), as well as the continuation and advancement of relevant research projects and initiatives.
•  The Federal Institute for Vocational Education and Training is also testing the further inter-linking of the analytical tools with the relevant accessible information and data sources, as well as the systematic preparation and presentation of occupational skills requirements and job matching options in the German labour market.
•  The  chemical  industry  social  partners  have  developed  an AI-supported  trend  analysis  of skills that are particularly relevant for the industry.53 They are also adapting the PYTHIA54 qualification analysis tool created as part of New Quality of Work Initiative to the specific needs of the chemical industry (publication in early summer 2021). After the two tools have been provided, a social partner-based communication strategy will be pursued to ensure that the findings are used and analytical tools are applied in companies.
53  17 German Federation of Chemical Employers’ Associations, IG Bergbau, Chemie, Energie. HR Forecast (2021). 
54  View the tool at https://personal-pythia.de/
[Page #58]
57
[Page #59]
None
[Page #60]
59
C | IN FOCUS 
Contributions to digitalisation in CET
The primary point of departure for the National Skills Strategy in 2019 was the ongoing digital transformation of our world of work, which has also fundamentally changed the general condi-tions for skills development and CET. The COVID-19 pandemic and the challenges it continues to pose provided the final impetus for making the digitalisation of CET a key priority area. As a cross-cutting topic, it plays a key role in the National Skills Strategy’s various formats of ex-change and in the supervisory Federation-Länder Committee as well. The topic was discussed in a separate workshop with a diverse group of experts and practitioners. 
One of the partners’ important goals is to simplify and systematise navigation around the CET market for potential CET participants, employees and human resources managers, bringing clarity to the diversity of CET programmes and advisory services. In future, dismantling barriers in the area of digital CET and developing an inclusive digital educational space will be primary tasks for the continued implementation of the joint strategy.
The COVID-19 pandemic and the challenges it continues to pose provided the final impetus for making the digitalisation of CET a key priority area.
COVID-19 PANDEMIC AS A DRIVER
The  digitalisation  of  CET  encompasses  everything  from  the  digital  tools  for information and skills development measures that are carried out in a digital or  hybrid  setting  to  digitally-certified  qualifications  and  their  storage.  Great expectations and scope for potential surround digital CET measures and digital tools for in-formation  and  documentation.  Companies  hope  to  integrate  employee  skills  development more easily into workflows through digital learning programmes and create more options for self-managed learning.55 Technology can enable learning to be integrated into everyday work routines in an individualised and flexible manner. Further, the flexibility of digital programmes with regard to place and time can make it easier for employees to balance learning with other obligations, or to pursue part-time learning. 
55  Klös, H.-P., Seyda, S., Werner, D. (2020): Berufliche Qualifizierung und Digitalisierung: Eine empirische Bestandsaufnahme.  In: IW-Report, No. 40/2020. German Economic Institute (pub.), Cologne.
[Page #61]
60
Micro learning
92 %
Knowledge platforms with compact learning programmes that can be called up as needed
Multimodal learning
86  %
Communication via different sensory channels, e.g. audio and video
Virtual reality
65  %
Training programmes in simulated work environments
Virtual mentoring
59  %
Mentoring in virtual learning environments
Personalised learning programmes
59  %
Learning programmes based on examinations or analyses
Gamification
57  %
Learning processes in the form of games or competition
Data analytics
54  %
Real-time analysis of work results
Augmented reality
54  %
Training programmes that use smartglasses in real work environments, among other features
Big data integration
43  %
Learning programmes with big data
Peer-assessed training
19  %
Rating of learning results by colleagues
Figure 4. Occupational CET: Findings from a survey on the future importance of digital products and services. Innovations of high to very high significance are included 
In the context of occupational CET, Figure 4 reflects the findings from a survey on the digital innovation that will be significant in future from the perspective of CET providers. 
Before the pandemic, companies and their employees generally viewed CET positively.56 Among education  providers,  a  large  majority  (80  per  cent)  already  used  digital  media  in  their  work. However, this was primarily for purposes of classroom training.57 Only one in 20 education pro-viders  primarily  relied  on virtual  formats,58  and  in  2018  only  four  per  cent  of  all  educational activities for adults took place in a purely online format.59
56 Bitkom/VdTüV (2018); Federal Ministry of Education and Research (2020): Digitalisierung in der Weiterbildung: Ergebnisse einer Zusatzstudie zum Adult Education Survey 2018. Federal Ministry of Education and Research, Bonn.
57 Christ, J. et al. (2020): Digitalisierung. Ergebnisse der wbmonitor Umfrage 2019. Federal Institute for Vocational Education and Training, Bonn. 
58 Christ, J. et al. (2020)
59 Federal Ministry of Education and Research (2020). 
[Page #62]
61
At the height of the pandemic, most on-site CET activities had to be postponed. As a result, many providers attempted to digitalise their programmes at short notice. Overall, CET expe-rienced a wave of digitalisation.60 In the area of funded CET, a simplified procedure was im-plemented  as  part  of  certification  in  the  framework  of  the  Regulation  on  the  Accreditation and Approval for Employment Promotion (Akkreditierungs- und Zulassungsverordnung Arbeits-förderung) to enable classroom-based activation measures to be carried out digitally on short notice. The number of companies that systematically invested in digital CET was almost 25 per cent higher in 2020 than two years previously.61 During the pandemic, larger companies also benefited from the fact that they had already established extensive internal digital personnel development and CET platforms. 
OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES
The pandemic has served as a magnifying glass pointed towards the digitalisation of CET, mak-ing the opportunities – and challenges – that existed before the pandemic and ensuing crisis clearly visible. It also highlighted the potential of digital tools and programmes. According to a  current  survey,  providers  of  in-company  CET  see  major  opportunities  in  measures  such  as smaller learning modules that users can access or download as needed (micro learning) and personalised CET programmes and learning pathways (see Fig 4). It has also become obvious that digitally-supported learning is still experienced in vastly different ways. Further, the rel-evant technical and spatial prerequisites are not available everywhere in sufficient quantity.62
The digital learning infrastructure plays a key role in enabling digital access to lifelong learning. It must be ensured that the psychological barriers to accessing vocational CET perceived by persons with low CET participation are not reinforced by digitalisation. Alongside basic digital skills  and  a  fundamentally  open  attitude,  instructors  require  additional  knowledge  of  digital didactics to be able to digitally supervise learning processes. Overall, instructor requirements and qualification needs are growing and changing significantly.63 64
Education providers require both the relevant know-how and investment resources for devel-oping  digital  programmes. This  poses  challenges  to  some  providers.  Other  providers  benefit from the investment they have already made in this area. According to a Federal Institute for Vocational Education and Training study, many observers predict a reduction here in the num-ber of companies in the CET market due to bankruptcy or takeovers.65
60 Federal Institute for Vocational Education and Training (2020): Stimmungsbild im Rahmen der Nationalen Weiterbildungsstrategie zu den Auswirkungen der Corona-Krise auf die berufsbezogene Weiterbildung, insbesondere hinsichtlich der Nutzung und des Potenzials digitalisierter Weiterbildungsangebote und -strukturen. Federal Institute for Vocational Education and Training, Bonn.
61 Bitkom (2020): Bitkom Digital Office Index 2020. In: Bitkom. URL: bitkom.org/doi-2020
62 Dos Santos, S., Ehlert, M., Hornberg, C., Scholl, F., Solga, H. (2020): Zu wenig Zeit, zu wenig Platz. In der Krise viele Hindernisse für Weiterbildung. In: WZB Mitteilungen, issue 168, p 63-65. Berlin Social Science Center, Berlin.  
63 Authoring group of the National Report on Education (2020). 
64 See Focal area 9 on the work and employment conditions of personnel in CET and the report of the working group ‘Good work in continuing education and training – work and employment conditions in vocational continuing education and training supported with public funds’.
65 Federal Institute for Vocational Education and Training (2020). 
[Page #63]
62
There are also many overarching questions from a practical viewpoint, including those regard-ing documentation and where appropriate, the recognition of digital learning results. The relat-ed open issues surround quality assurance, the eligibility of digital CET programmes for funding, data privacy protection and the use of accrued and available (learning) data. They must be clar-ified in order to ensure reliability and create trust. 
The  key  to  higher  acceptance  and  learning  success  of  digital  teaching/learning  technologies is their thorough integration into the learning process and meaningful connection to didactic concepts. Experience shows that playful approaches (e.g. gamification) in the teaching/learn-ing process can contribute to significantly increasing or maintaining motivation to learn.66 The same applies to the documentation of individual learning results – by means of badges or in the form of the micro or nano degrees increasingly used in the area of IT skills in particular. If use is made of these options for low-threshold learning programmes, persons with negative learning experiences or formally low-skilled persons and those who are out of practice could benefit greatly.67 Companies that have established appealing digital learning portals to support their CET culture have noted a significant increase in willingness to learn. 68
66 Schuldt, J. (2020): Lernspiele und Gamification. In: Niegemann H., Weinberger A. (pub.) Handbuch Bildungstechnologie. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. DOI. doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-54368-9_18
67 Seyda, S. (2019): Wie die Digitalisierung genutzt werden kann, um Geringqualifizierte weiterzubilden: Handlungsempfehlung an Individuen, Unternehmen und Bildungsanbieter sowie die Bundesagentur für Arbeit. German Economic Institute, IW Policy Paper, No. 7/2019, German Economic Institute, Cologne.
68 Deutsche Telekom, IBM and Deutsche Bahn could be mentioned as examples here. Jacobs, J. C., Kagermann, H., Spath, D. (2020): Lebenslanges Lernen fördern. Gute Beispiele aus der Praxis. Ein Good-Practice-Bericht des Human-Resources-Kreises von acatech. Lessons Learned, wissenschaftliche Analysen und Handlungsoptionen (acatech DISKUSSION), acatech – National Academy of Science and Engineering, Munich.
[Page #64]
63
OUTLOOK
Subsequent to the implementation of the National Skills Strategy, various measures have been agreed and implemented to support digitalisation in CET.
•  The INVITE innovation competition is funding projects that are creating the basis for an innovative, inclusive digital CET space and developing AI-supported individualised and personalised digital programmes.
•  The development of a central online entry portal for vocational CET is being tested for 
feasibility (project definition phase).
•  Qualifizierungsinitiative Digitaler Wandel – Q 4.0, a skills development initiative, is develop-ing and testing an innovative skills development format for vocational education personnel.
•  The  Regulation  on  the Accreditation  and Approval  for  Employment  Promotion  has  been developed further as part of the law on promotion of further training in times of structural change and further development of the promotion of initial vocational training (‘Work of Tomorrow Act’) with the aim of making digital learning formats eligible for funding.
•  German educational institutions participated in the pilot initiative for the first prototype of the infrastructure for the issuance of digital skills documentation (EDCI Issuer, EDCI = Europass digital credential infrastructure), which was released with the publication of the new EUROPASS portal. The lessons learned will be integrated into follow-up activities on digital credentials, for example, in INVITE subprojects.
The development of a digital CET space will be of special significance in future. In the way of a mission statement, the term ‘digital education space’ represents a digital architecture in the CET field that designs access to CET with as low a threshold as possible and presents programmes that are tailored to individual needs in terms of content, format and scope. It aims to make it as easy as possible for people to further educate and train themselves on an ongoing basis. 
In  this  context,  a  discussion  about  which  overarching  digital  standards  are  required  for  the implementation of, for example, activation measures, documentation of skills or for regional partnerships and what company concepts could look like in detail must be held. Another topic of  discussion  should  be  which  digital  skills  are  required  and  which  ‘non-digital’  skills  could generally be taught with digital means.
For the realisation and sustainable design of a user-orientated digital space for vocational CET, a discussion and participation format to be held at regular intervals should also be planned as part of the National Skills Strategy.
With the launching of the federal government’s Initiative Digitale Bildung (digital education ini-tiative), the prerequisites for linking existing and new digital education platforms on a cross-ed-ucational basis to create a compatible platform ecosystem are being created. In 2021, the Fed-eral Ministry of Education and Research will fund the development of several prototypes in the first step towards establishing the platform.
The strengthening of education in the digital world is a challenge to society as a whole. The conditions for CET in the digital world must be continuously improved in an integrated manner. The creation of a digital CET space requires the committed participation of all relevant partners.
[Page #65]
S E C T I O N  3
What remains to be done? 
[Page #66]
65
Section 2 presented the contributions of the National Skills Strategy partners and documented the  findings  of  the  innovation  labs.  The  majority  of  the  agreed  measures  from  the  strategy paper of the National Skills Strategy have been or are being implemented. In the wake of the recent acceleration of digitalisation in continuing education and training (CET), topics that re-quire more attention, such as literacy, basic education, guidance and quality assurance, were advanced in innovation labs and workshops. Given the momentum for international integration, the OECD country report for Germany derives recommendations which, from the organisation’s viewpoint, provide possible points of reference for the advancement of a national CET strat-egy for each country. The report focused on targeting the way low-skilled persons with low participation in CET are reached and supported, increasing coherence among existing funding programmes and overall, increasing investment in CET.69
The  National  Skills  Strategy  implementation  process  has  established  a new culture of partnership among the participating decision-makers and other stakeholders from the realms of research and practice. In order to sustainably  strengthen  Germany’s  CET  culture,  the  topics  highlighted in the key priority areas must be developed further. Through systematic stocktaking processes and developing specific recommendations for ac-tion, the National Skills Strategy innovation labs and working group have laid  an  important  foundation  that  provides  points  of  reference  for  the work ahead. 
The National Skills Strategy implementation process has established a new culture of partnership among the participating decision-makers and other stakeholders from the realms of research and practice.
Above  and  beyond  key  priority  areas  and  innovation  labs,  the  partners have highlighted four primary cross-cutting topics for the further imple-mentation process of the National Skills Strategy:
•  simplifying access to advisory and guidance services, funding and CET programmes while 
taking financial conditions and time constraints into account
•  intensifying partnerships in regions and industries 
•  advancing concepts for the skills of the future, in-company skills development planning 
and collective bargaining approaches to strengthening CET
•  strengthening digital CET through greater transparency and innovative learning 
programmes.  
In  the  following,  an  overview  of  the  main  conclusions  from  the  completed  implementation phase  will  be  presented  topic  by  topic.  The  solutions  and  next  steps  that  can  be  taken  to strengthen vocational CET in Germany in the identified areas will also be described.
69 OECD (2021): Continuing Education and Training in Germany, Getting Skills Right. OECD Publishing, Paris.
[Page #67]
66
MAIN RECOMMENDATIONS AND NEXT STEPS
Points  of  connection:  A  process  description  should  be  developed  to  pave  the  way  towards second-chance vocational qualification for persons without any usable formal vocational qual-ification. The process should range from guidance and advisory services and the validation of informally  and  non-formally  acquired  vocational  skills  to  supplementary  skills  development programmes. In this way, it will become possible to develop skilled workers and enlarge indi-vidual career development prospects.
Advice and guidance: In the realm of CET guidance, collaboration and networking among ad-visory institutions should be expanded and improved – also through support from the national CET platform. Another stipulation is that CET guidance, such as that provided by CET mentors, should be designed with the target group in mind. In particular, the use of advisory services by groups of persons with lower CET participation, such as migrants, must be increased. The exist-ing quality assurance tools must be examined with regard to their suitability for application in digital education programmes. Further, a digital checklist should be developed.
Literacy and basic education: Public funding and the structural conditions for the work-orien-tated literacy and basic education of adults should continue to be strengthened. Based on prac-tical experience, a working group that involves the social partners should examine which course models might be effective and how projects for literacy and basic education and the Federal Employment Agency’s existing tools can be meaningfully applied in this context. The Länder are  pursuing  the  aim  of  needs-based,  sustainable  development  of  the  regulatory  structures for adult literacy and basic education. This includes support for learning programmes via adult education centres and other CET institutions, courses or where applicable, basic education cen-tres. The Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs aims to enable – for a limited time – the acquisition  of  basic  skills  in  the  context  of  CET  programmes  that  do  not  lead  to  any  formal qualification  and  simplify  return-to-learn  opportunities  to  obtain  a  secondary  school-level qualification as part of promoting vocational CET. The Federal Employment Agency will work to ensure that the existing financial support opportunities are used to greater effect in order to motivate persons with low literacy in particular to begin a CET course. 
Funding programmes and assistance: Financial assistance for employees has been significantly expanded and company support for in-company CET has been intensified. However, all part-ners must work together to increase awareness and take-up. Further, given the ongoing digital and  ecological  structural  transformation  for  all  stakeholders  in vocational  CET,  the  need  for advancing tools for support and funding must be examined on an ongoing basis. In the area of individual CET as well, further efforts should be examined with the aim of more strongly supporting employment pathways in all income and skills categories and irrespective of gender during the structural change.
[Page #68]
67
Networking: Central public or publicly-funded institutions such as the Federal Employment Agency, inter-company training centres, vocational schools and adult education centres exer-cise an important coordination function in the regions. With the establishment of new regional networks, an important contribution to networking could be created if all relevant stakeholders are involved. The steps taken in this direction should be expanded. The stronger interlinking of CET programmes among companies as aimed for in the Aufbau von Weiterbildungsverbünden federal programme, for example, should also be a goal. A second call for funding in this area was launched in August 2021. 
Federal  government  and  the  Länder:  To  intensify  their  collaboration  in  the  CET  field  and strengthen the coherence of the support programmes, the federal government and Länder are working  towards  a  coordinated  procedure,  where  appropriate  in  the  context  of ‘CET  chains’ (sequences of complementary CET courses). 
Personnel in CET: Satisfying work and continuous skills development for CET personnel are prerequisites for stabilising and advancing the quality and appeal of CET measures. With a fo-cus on strengthening the digital skills of CET personnel, a Standing Conference of Education Ministers initiative on the harmonisation of recommendations for action for instructor CET will be examined. 
Strategic outlook: The  assessment  of  future  needs  for  skills  and  CET  must  be  improved. To further this aim, products and formats with low-threshold access for small and medium-sized enterprises and employees are required alongside the further development of innovative re-search approaches. Tools for evaluating personnel development and CET needs must still be developed. 
Digitalisation  of  CET: The  strengthening  of  education  in  the  digital  world  is  a  challenge  to society as a whole. The conditions for CET in the digital space must be systematically and con-tinuously  improved  –  from  the  infrastructure,  information  provision  and  digital  and  hybrid measures to digitally-certified certificates of qualification. The creation of a digital CET space requires the committed participation of all relevant partners. The INVITE innovation competi-tion aims to increase the user-orientation of digital CET platforms and the transparency of CET programmes and expand the array of digital, individualised CET programmes. The design of the national online CET platform (NOW!), jointly discussed as part of the National Skills Strategy, will  be  further  developed  in  close  coordination  with  the  Länder  and  social  partners.  As  part of the federal government’s Initiative Digitale Bildung, a national education platform will be created to interconnect existing and new platforms and learning programmes with the aim of making it easier to find educational programmes, making them available in a manner that can be adjusted to specific contexts and individual needs. In the process, common open standards and existing contexts – in particular, the Online Access Act (Onlinezugangsgesetz) – will be used and developed further. The complementary projects and their synergies should retain a strong reference to each other.
[Page #69]
S E C T I O N  4
What happensnext? 
[Page #70]
69
The National Skills Strategy is the successful culmination of a long-term, overarching partner-ship-orientated discussion process around continuing education and training (CET) policy. The process was conceived as an interministerial approach and several federal ministries share the responsibility for it. At the same time, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic has heightened the necessity of a CET strategy orientated towards the accelerated transformation.
The COVID-19 pandemic has once again made it clear that CET is a top priority in strength-ening  the  resilience  of  persons  and  organisations  in  extraordinary  times.  Consequently,  CET has become a decisive issue of the future for economic stability and a more cohesive society. A broad political and social dialogue and the joint search for forward-looking, sustainable solu-tions are required in order to examine CET and skills development. The National Skills Strategy has an outstandingly high degree of reliability and systematic connection between strategy de-velopment and the implementation processes, which in turn have led to fresh momentum and many steps forward. 
From the very beginning, open, co-creative formats for policy creation have been integrated into the strategy paper’s development process. Specific contributions and agreements from all the partners to the strategy paper generated a high level of commitment for the implemen-tation process, which extends beyond the current legislative period. In its country report on Germany, concomitant with that of the National Skills Strategy, the OECD praised the cooper-ation among the national stakeholders and recommended that the participatory structures be advanced and intensified.70
The  17  partners  proposed  the  consistent  continuation  of  the  initiated  activities and the National Skills Strategy guidance and discussion process. The culture of cooperation that was created in the National Skills Strategy and  proven  institutional  formats  of  exchange  such  as  the  National  Skills Strategy Board and the Federation-Länder Committee accompanying the National Skills Strategy can be built upon further. 
The 17 partners proposed the consistent continuation of the initiated activities and the National Skills Strategy guidance and discussion process. 
With  a  focus  on  pending  implementation  steps  and  the  new  challenges posed by the pandemic, the work and cooperation structure should be sys-tematically  advanced. This  approach  is  already  embedded  in  the  strategy paper of the National Skills Strategy as follows: ‘In 2021, a joint report will be produced reviewing the National Skills Strategy’s state of implementation and key objec-tives, and potentially further developing them.’71
70 OECD (2021).
71 Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, Federal Ministry of Education and Research (pub.) (2019): Strategiepapier Nationale Weiterbildungsstrategie (2019). Berlin, p 23.
[Page #71]
70
For a future strategic approach based on the past work in the National Skills Strategy inno-vation  labs,  the  organisational  form  and  content  in  which  the  key  priority  areas  should  be further developed must be examined. Moreover, new relevant thematic focal areas could be discussed, or existing focal areas intensified: for example, in response to the ecological trans-formation.72 As already intermittently tested in the process of formulating the National Skills Strategy, agile working methods should be applied in the coming years. The further integra-tion of expertise from the realms of practice and research should also be examined. The ex-isting approaches to tracking key milestones and the progress of implementation should be systematically continued.
The continuation of the National Skills Strategy will benefit if the partners systematically form networks and coordinate their work outside of the official body. In this spirit, the Federation- Länder Committee will be continued as a meaningful tool for coordination between the federal government and the Länder.
Concerning the international perspective, the partners view the advancement of the Nation-al Skills Strategy as a specific contribution and ‘good practice’ for the implementation of the updated Skills Agenda of the European Commission and the Osnabrück Declaration on voca-tional education and training adopted during the German EU Council Presidency in November 2020.  Both  initiatives  highlight  the  importance  of  national  skills  development  strategies  for high-quality, inclusive lifelong learning. At the same time, Germany is providing decisive mo-mentum for vocational education in Europe with its National Skills Strategy.
72 Expert Commission for the Third Gender Equality Report of the German Federal Government (2021): Digitalisierung geschlechtergerecht gestalten. Gutachten für den Dritten Gleichstellungsbericht der Bundesregierung. Geschäftsstelle Dritter Gleichstellungsbericht, Berlin, p 90.
[Page #72]
71
[Page #73]
72
REFERENCES 
Arntz, M., Gregory, T., Zierahn, U. (2020): Digitalisierung und die Zukunft der Arbeit. In: Wirtschaftsdienst (13). DOI: 10.1007/s10273-020-2614-6. 
Association  of  German  Chambers  of  Industry  and  Commerce  (2021):  Berufiche  Weiter-bildung  zahlt  sich  aus.  in:  Association  of  German  Chambers  of  Industry  and  Commerce. URL: dihk.de/de/themen-und-positionen/fachkraefte/berufiche-weiterbildung-zahlt-sich-aus. 
Association of German Chambers of Industry and Commerce (2020): Top Abschlüsse. Top Perspektiven. Erfolg mit Höherer Berufsbildung. In: Association of German Chambers of Industry and Commerce. URL: dihk-bildung.shop/weiterbildung/informationsmaterialien/ hoehere-berufsbildung/. 
Association of German Chambers of Industry and Commerce (2017): Wachsende Herausforderungen treffen auf größeren Optimismus. Das IHK-Unternehmensbarometer zur Digitalisierung. DIHK, Berlin and Brussels. 
Author group of the National Report on Education (2020): Bildung in Deutschland 2020. Ein indikatorengestützter Bericht mit einer Analyse zu Bildung in einer digitalisierten Welt. Funded by the Standing Conference of the Ministers of Education and Cultural Affairs of the Länder in the Federal Republic of Germany and the Federal Ministry for Education and Research. In: Deutsche Nationalbibliothek. URL: http://portal.dnb.de. 
Bitkom (2020): Bitkom Digital Offce Index 2020. In: Bitkom. URL: bitkom.org/doi-2020 
Bitkom/TüV Verband (pub.) (2018): Weiterbildung für die digitale Arbeitswelt: Eine repräsentative Untersuchung von Bitkom Research im Auftrag des VdTÜV e. V. und des Bitkom e. V. Berlin. 
Christ, J. et al. (2020): Digitalisierung. Ergebnisse der wbmonitor Umfrage 2019. Federal Institute for Vocational Education and Training, Bonn. 
Dohmen, D., Cordes, M. (2019): Kosten der Weiterbildung in Deutschland. Verteilung der Finanzlasten auf Unternehmen, Privatpersonen, öffentliche Hand. Study as part of the ‘Economic and regional costs, funding structures and benefts of continuing education’ project. Funded by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research, FiBS Forum No. 61, FiBS Research Institute for the Economics of Education and Social Affairs, Berlin. 
Dos Santos, S., Ehlert, M., Hornberg, C., Scholl, F., Solga, H. (2020): Zu wenig Zeit, zu wenig Platz. In der Krise viele Hindernisse für Weiterbildung. In: WZB Mitteilungen, issue 168, p 63-65. Berlin Social Science Center, Berlin.   
EFI – Commission of Experts for Research and Innovation (2021): Report [on German research, innovation and technological ability] 2021. EFI, Berlin. 
[Page #74]
73
Ehlert, M. (2020): Individuelle berufsbezogene Weiterbildung und Umschulung: Aktuelle Daten zu Bedarf und Teilnahme aus dem NEPS. Präsentation im Rahmen des Fachgesprächs des Gesprächskreises Weiterbildungspolitik am 02.09.2020. Friedrich-Ebert-Foundation, Berlin. 
Expert Commission for the Third Gender Equality Report of the German Federal Government (2021): Digitalisierung geschlechtergerecht gestalten. Gutachten für den Dritten Gleichstellungsbericht der Bundesregierung. Geschäftsstelle Dritter Gleichstellungsbericht, Berlin, p 90. 
Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs (pub.) (2021): Forschungsbericht 526/3: Aktualisierte BMAS-Prognose ‘Digitalisierte Arbeitswelt’. Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, Berlin. 
Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, Federal Ministry of Education and Research (pub.) (2019): Strategiepapier Nationale Weiterbildungsstrategie, Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, Federal Ministry of Education and Research, Berlin. 
Federal Ministry of Education and Research (2019), p 69, Table 22. Müller, N., Wenzel-mann, F. (2020): Berufiche Weiterbildung. Teilnahme und Abstinenz. In: Zeitschrift für Weiterbildungsforschung, No. 43, pp 47–73. DOI: doi.org/10.1007/s40955-019-0141-0. 
Federal Ministry of Education and Research (pub.) (2019): Weiterbildungsverhalten in Deutschland 2018. Ergebnisse des Adult Education Survey – AES-Trendbericht. Federal Ministry of Education and Research, Bonn. 
Federal Ministry of Education and Research (2020): InnoVet. In: Federal Ministry of Education and Research, Innovet. URL: inno-vet.de/de/lbt-forward.html. 
Federal Ministry of Education and Research (2020): Digitalisierung in der Weiterbildung: Ergebnisse einer Zusatzstudie zum Adult Education Survey 2018. Federal Ministry of Education and Research, Bonn. 
Federal Institute for Vocational Education and Training (2020): Datenreport zum Berufsbil-dungsbericht 2020. Ratgeber zur berufichen Weiterbildung. Federal Institute for Vocational Education and Training, Bonn. 
Federal Institute for Vocational Education and Training (2020): Stimmungsbild im Rahmen der Nationalen Weiterbildungsstrategie zu den Auswirkungen der Corona-Krise auf die berufsbezogene Weiterbildung, insbesondere hinsichtlich der Nutzung und des Potenzials digitalisierter Weiterbildungsangebote und -strukturen. Federal Institute for Vocational Education and Training, Bonn. 
Federal Institute for Vocational Education and Training (2018): Datenreport zum Berufsbil-dungsbericht 2018, Informationen und Analysen zur Entwicklung der berufichen Bildung. Federal Ministry of Education and Research, Bonn. 
[Page #75]
74
German Bundestag (2021): Bericht der Bundesregierung über die Förderung der berufi-chen Weiterbildung im Rahmen der aktiven Arbeitsförderung und die entsprechenden Ausgaben. Drucksache 19/25785. In: German Bundestag. URL: dip21.bundestag.de/dip21/ btd/19/257/1925785.pdf. 
German Federation of Chemical Employers’ Associations (BAVC), Industriegewerkschaft Bergbau, Chemie, Energie (IG BCE) and HR Forecast (pub.) (2021): An analysis of the skills requirements of the future. The Future Skills Report Chemistry. BAVC, IG BCE, HR Forecast, Munich. In: The Future Skills Report Chemistry. URL: future-skills-chemie.de/en/. 
Grotelüschen, A., Buddeberg, K., Dutz, G., Heilmann, L., Stammer, C. (2019): Leo 2018. Leben mit geringer Literalität. Press brochure, Hamburg. 
Hall, A., Sevindik, U. (2018): Einfacharbeit in Deutschland – wer arbeitet was unter welchen Bedingungen? Ergebnisse aus der BIBB/BAuA-Erwerbstätigenbefragung 2018. Federal Institute for Vocational Education and Training, Bonn. 
Heß, P., Janssen, S., Leber, U. (2019): Beschäftigte, deren Tätigkeiten durch Technologien ersetzbar sind, bilden sich seltener weiter. IAB-Kurzbericht 16/2019. Institute for Employment Research, Nuremberg. 
Institute for Employment Research Establishment Panel (2017): Daten. Institute for Employment Research press conference ‘Betriebliche Weiterbildung’ on 22 March 2017. 
Jacobs, J. C., Kagermann, H., Spath, D. (2020): Lebenslanges Lernen fördern. Gute Beispiele aus der Praxis. Ein Good-Practice-Bericht des Human-Resources-Kreises von acatech. Lessons Learned, wissenschaftliche Analysen und Handlungsoptionen (acatech DISKUSSION), acatech – National Academy of Science and Engineering, Munich. 
Klös, H.-P., Seyda, S., Werner, D. (2020): Berufiche Qualifzierung und Digitalisierung: Eine empirische Bestandsaufnahme. In: IW-Report, No. 40/2020. German Economic Institute (pub.), Cologne. 
Kruppe, T., Mühlhan, J., Weber, E., Wiemers, J. (2019): Gesamtfskalische Wirkungen von Weiterbildungsförderung: Öffentliche Ausgaben generieren hohe Rückfüsse. IAB-Kurzbericht 08/2019, Institute for Employment Research, Nuremberg. 
Matthes, B., Müller, G. (2021): Ergebnisse der Machbarkeitsstudie Kompetenz-Kompass zu den Branchen Maschinenbau, IKT und Gesundheitswesen. Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, Berlin. 
National Platform Future of Mobility (2020): Working group 4. Securing Germany as a place for mobility, production, battery cell production, primary materials and recycling, training and qualifcation. Focus Group Strategic Personnel Planning and Development. 1st Interim Report on Strategic Human Resources Planning and Development in the Mobility Sector (German language report) in: National Platform Future of Mobility Berlin. URL: plattform-zukunft-mobilitaet.de/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/NPM-AG-4-1-Zwischen-bericht-zur-strategischen-Personalplanung-und-Entwicklung-im-Mobilit%C3%A4tssektor.pdf. 
[Page #76]
75
Nedelkoska, L., Quintini, G. (2018): Automation, skills use and training. In: OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers, No. 202, OECD Publishing, Paris. URL: dx.doi.org/10.1787/2e2f4eea-en. 
OECD (2021): Continuing Education and Training in Germany, Getting Skills Right. OECD Publishing, Paris. 
Osiander, C., Stephan, G. (2018): Gerade geringqualifzierte Beschäftigte sehen bei der berufichen Weiterbildung viele Hürden. In: IAB-Forum, 2. August 2018. URL: iab-forum.de/gerade-geringqualifzierte-beschaeftigte-sehen-bei-der-berufichen -weiterbildungviele-huerden/. 
Own calculation based on statistics from the Federal Employment Agency (2020): Länderreport über Beschäftigte. Deutschland, West/Ost und Länder. Federal Employment Agency, Nuremberg. 
Schuldt, J. (2020): Lernspiele und Gamifcation. In: Niegemann H., Weinberger A. (pub.) Handbuch Bildungstechnologie. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. DOI. doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-54368-9_18. 
Seyda, S. (2019): Wie die Digitalisierung genutzt werden kann, um Geringqualifzierte weiterzubilden: Handlungsempfehlung an Individuen, Unternehmen und Bildungsanbieter sowie die Bundesagentur für Arbeit. German Economic Institute, IW Policy Paper, No. 7/2019, German Economic Institute, Cologne. 
Seyda, S., Placke, B. (2020): IW-Weiterbildungserhebung 2020: Weiterbildung auf Wachstumskurs. in: IW-Trends (04/2020), German Economic Institute (pub.), Cologne. 
Standing Conference of Education Ministers (2020): Ländervereinbarung über die gemeinsame Grundstruktur des Schulwesens und die gesamtstaatliche Verantwortung der Länder in zentralen bildungspolitischen Fragen. Beschluss der Kultusministerkonferenz vom 15.10.2020. In: Standing Conference of Education Ministers URL: kmk.org/fleadmin/ Dateien/veroeffentlichungen_beschluesse/2020/2020_10_15-Laendervereinbarung.pdf 
Standing Conference of Education Ministers (2019): Kompetenzorientiertes Qualifkation-sprofl zur Integration der Thematik „Wirtschaft 4.0“ in die Ausbildung an Fachschulen für Wirtschaft. Beschluss der Kultusministerkonferenz vom 13.12.2019. Berlin. 
Federal Statistical Offce (2020): Bildungsfnanzbericht 2020. Im Auftrag des Bundes-ministeriums für Bildung und Forschung und der Ständigen Konferenz der Kultusminister der Länder in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland. Destatis, Wiesbaden. 
Westdeutscher Handwerkskammertag (2021): Projektkoordination ValiKom-Transfer. Federal Ministry of Education and Research, project report dated 28.02.2021. 
Zenzen, J., Patuzzi, M. (2019): Stellungnahme des AZAV-Beirats zur AZAV-Evaluation, 10. Oktober 2019. In: Federal Employment Agency. URL: www.arbeitsagentur.de/datei/ ba900145.pdf 
[Page #77]
76
Imprint
Publisher Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs Secretariat of the National Skills Strategy Wilhelmstraße 49, 10117 Berlin 
Printing Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs Press, Bonn Printed on 100% recycled paper 
Federal Ministry of Education and Research Division 315: Continuing Vocational Training Kapelle-Ufer 1, 10117 Berlin 
If you would like to cite this publication, please reference the above publisher, title and publication status exactly as indicated above. Please also send a specimen copy to the publishers. 
Version: June 2021 
The publication has been published free of charge as part of the public relations work of the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs. It may not be used for campaign purposes by political parties, candidates for offce or election helpers during an election. This applies to elections at the European, federal, state and municipal levels. Improper use constitutes its dissemination at election-related events or party information stands and the insertion, printing or affxing of political party information or promotional materials. Forwarding to third parties for purposes of election campaigning is also prohibited. Irrespective of when, how and how many issues of this publication are received by its addressees, it may not be used in a manner that could be construed as the federal government favouring one political group over another, even without a chronological connection to an imminent election. 
Project coordination Dr Sven Rahner (Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs), Stefan Angermüller (Federal Ministry of Edu-cation and Research), Michael Schulze (Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs), Marie Ullmann (Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs), Dr Michael Dörsam (Federal Institute for Vocational Education and Training), Aileen Körfer (Federal Institute for Vocational Education and Training) 
Editorial team Stefan Angermüller (Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs), Dr Nicole Cujai (Federal Employment Agency), Dr Michael Dörsam (Federal Institute for Vocational Education and Training), Thomas Friedrich (Federal Employment Agency), Dr Oliver Heikaus (Association of German Chambers of Industry and Commerce), Frank Ißleib (MWVLW RLP/Conference of Economic Ministers), Stefanie Janczyk (IG Metall), Aileen Körfer (Federal Ins-titute for Vocational Education and Training), Katja Lack (Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs), Susanne Müller (Confederation of German Employers’ Associati-ons), Mario Patuzzi (German Trade Union Confederation), Dr Sven Rahner (Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Af-fairs), Dr Ulrich Raiser (SENBJF BE/Standing Conference of Education Ministers), Michael Schulze (Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs), Marie Ullmann (Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs), Giovanni Viola (Federal Institute for Vocational Education and Training) 
Further, this free publication is not intended for resale irrespec-tive of when, how and how many issues of this publication are received by its addressees. 
All rights reserved, including the mechanical reproduction and reprinting of excerpts. This implementation report is also available in the German language and online at bmas.de/en and bmbf.de/bmbf/en. 
ORDER SERVICE 
If you would like to submit an order Order no. A805e 
Design and production KOMPAKTMEDIEN Agentur für Kommunikation GmbH 
Telephone: +49 (0) 30 182 722 721 Fax: +49 (0) 30 18 102 722 721 Email: publikationen@bundesregierung.de Internet: bmas.de/en, bmbf.de/bmbf/en Postal address: Publication dispatch of the federal government: Postbox 48 10 09 / 18132 Rostock, Germany 
Wigwam eG 
Visual assets Page 8: BMAS/Dominik Butzmann Page 9: BMBF/Laurence Chaperon Page 10: iStock/vm Page 17: iStock/VioletaStoimenova Page 19: iStock/DuxX Page 22: iStock/BongkarnThanyakij Page 25: iStock/CasarsaGuru Page 27: Getty Images/10‘000 Hours Page 28: iStock/Drazen_ Page 31: iStock/alvarez Page 33: iStock/oatawa Page 34: iStock/Tzido Page 39: iStock/Drazen Zigic Page 51: Getty Images/Thomas Barwick Page 55: iStock/andresr Page 57: Getty Images/Westend61 Page 58: iStock/seksan mongkhonkhamsao Page 62: iStock/FG Trade Page 71: iStock/stockfour 
Service for the deaf and hearing impaired Email: info.gehoerlos@bmas.bund.de Fax: +49 (0) 30 221 911 017 Sign language telephone: gebaerdentelefon.de/bmas 
[Page #78]
None
[Page #79]
None
