T E C H N I C I A N S  A N D   I N N O VAT I O N : 
A   L I T E R AT U R E   R E V I E W

PA U L   L E W I S

D E PA R T M E N T   O F   P O L I T I C A L   E C O N O M Y

K I N G ’ S   C O L L E G E   L O N D O N
G AT S B Y   I S  A   F O U N D AT I O N   S E T   U P 
B Y   D AV I D   S A I N S B U R Y
TO   R E A L I S E   H I S   C H A R I TA B L E   O B J E C T I V E S .
W E   F O C U S   O U R   S U P P O R T   O N  A   L I M I T E D
N U M B E R   O F  A R E A S :

  P L A N T   S C I E N C E   R E S E A R C H

N E U R O S C I E N C E   R E S E A R C H

S C I E N C E  A N D   E N G I N E E R I N G   E D U C AT I O N

E C O N O M I C   D E V E L O P M E N T   I N  A F R I C A

P U B L I C   P O L I C Y   R E S E A R C H  A N D  A D V I C E

T H E  A R T S

 W E  A R E   P R OAC T I V E   I N   D E V I S I N G   P R O J E C T S
TO  AC H I E V E   O U R  A I M S . W E  A R E   E N T H U S I A S T I C
A B O U T   S U P P O R T I N G   I N N O VAT I O N . W E  A R E 
A N A LY T I C A L  A S  W E   B E L I E V E   I T   I S   I M P O R TA N T 
TO   U N D E R S TA N D  T H E   O P P O R T U N I T I E S
A N D   P R O B L E M S  W E  TAC K L E . W E  TA K E  A 
L O N G - T E R M  V I E W  A S  W E   D O   N OT  T H I N K   M U C H 
C A N   B E  AC H I E V E D   B Y   S H O R T,  O N E - O F F 
P R O J E C T S . W E  A R E  A LWAY S   E AG E R  TO   F O R M 
PA R T N E R S H I P S  W I T H   O R G A N I S AT I O N S  W H O 
S H A R E   O U R   G OA L S .

T h e   G a t s b y   C h a r i t a b l e   F o u n d a t i o n

T h e   Pe a k ,  5  W i l t o n   R o a d ,  L o n d o n   S W 1 V   1 A P

T   + 4 4   ( 0 ) 2 0   7 4 1 0   0 3 3 0       F   + 4 4   ( 0 ) 2 0   7 4 1 0   0 3 3 2

w w w. g a t s b y. o r g . u k

C o p y r i g h t   ©   G a t s b y   C h a r i t a b l e   F o u n d a t i o n   2 0 1 9
CONTENTS

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

4

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

5

1. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND 

7

2. INNOVATION  

9 

3. THE INNOVATION SYSTEMS APPROACH 

10

4. INNOVATION POLICY: THE ‘SYSTEM THEORETIC’ RATIONALE FOR GOVERNMENT  
INTERVENTION TO SUPPORT THE DIFFUSION OF NEW TECHNOLOGIES 

13

5. THE INNOVATION SYSTEMS APPROACH AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION 

15

6. CONCLUSION 

31

REFERENCES 

32

3
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The research on which this report is based was funded by the Gatsby Charitable 
Foundation, whose support is gratefully acknowledged. I am indebted to Daniel 
Sandford Smith, Lauren Golding, Ronnie Ramolgan and Paul Shakespeare for very 
helpful comments on previous versions of the report. I am also extremely grateful 
for advice and encouragement received from Stan Metcalfe, Richard Nelson and 
David Soskice. None of those named should be held responsible for any errors and 
infelicities in what follows.

4
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Innovation involves both the invention of completely new ideas and also the use 
of existing ideas by organisations that have not hitherto employed them. It is the 
means through which new knowledge is applied to economic processes in order 
to increase productivity and add value to economic activity. As such, it is the 
engine of long-term economic growth and development, and the major source of 
productivity and rising living standards.

However, a shortage of technicians is hampering innovation in the UK. 

This is the principal conclusion of this report by Paul Lewis, who has examined the 
supply and training of technicians who contribute to the development and use of 
technologies that are key to the future success of advanced manufacturing in the UK. 

Technicians make significant contributions to innovation. Perhaps most important 
of all, they have a critical role to play in enabling firms successfully to exploit new 
technology. In the UK, however, the critical role played by technicians all too often 
goes unrecognised. 

Innovation has often been thought of as linear process, whereby new knowledge 
is created through fundemental scientific research and is then applied to create 
novel products and production processes. On this view, the creation of the 
knowledge involved in innovation is the exclusive preserve of highly-educated 
scientists and engineers. However, evidence suggests that the linear view is 
mistaken and that innovation is in fact non-linear in nature, characterised by 
complicated feedback mechanisms and interactive relations involving science, 
technology, production, and use. For example, rather than simply implementing 
ideas developed by the scientists and engineers involved in R&D, technicians 
draw on their experience of using and maintaining technology to provide 
suggestions about how it can be improved. According to this perspective, 
technicians make an indispenable contribution to innovation.

The innovation systems approach uses the evidence on the non-linear nature 
of innovation to identify a whole range of aspects that are critical to innovation, 
including the practical and theoretical knowledge embodied in skilled workers at  
all levels, including technicians.

In the UK, a commitment on the part of policy-makers to a linear view of 
innovation over-emphasises fundamental research and development, and so 
neglects other important influences on innovation, in particular those stemming 
from technicians, obscuring the critical role they play.   

The author suggests that an important step change required to drive innovation in 
the UK is to improve the quality of technician training, which currently all too often 
fails to provide firms with a workforce possessing the right quantity, and blend, of 
practical and theoretical knowledge to make the best use of new technologies. One 
of the reasons that technician training has been neglected is that an over-supply of 
graduates has masked technician shortages, but these graduates are unlikely to have 
the practical experience and skills which are so critical to the technician role.

5
The report goes on to suggest that centres of innovation, such as Catapults, which 
are at the forefront of technology development, should play a role in the training of 
technicians and that these centres could make a significant contribution to training 
for innovation by working with training providers to ensure they understand the 
skills requirements of emerging technologies and enabling access to training on the 
latest equipment and facilities.

The report then concludes with the following recommendations:

a)  Greater consideration should be given to the importance of technicians in 
the innovation system by firstly ensuring that the funding regime does not 
discourage colleges and other providers from offering technician training 
courses; and secondly by requiring Catapults to include workforce planning 
alongside technology development within their remit

b)  Centres of excellence, possibly the new Institutes of Technology, should work 

with Catapults to develop courses on emerging technologies which could also 
be delivered through distance learning

c)  Policymakers should ensure that apprenticeships and other forms of technician 

training develop the broad occupational competence and underpinning 
knowledge so that technicians can assist in the deployment and development 
of new technologies involved in innovation

d)  Further research should be conducted to explore how high-performance 

working can contribute to innovation in the UK

6
1. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND

Innovation is the process whereby new technologies are created and diffuse 
throughout the economy so as to create new commercially-viable products 
and novel methods of producing existing goods and services. It involves both 
the invention of completely new ideas and also the use of existing ideas by 
organisations that have not hitherto employed them. It is the means through which 
new knowledge is applied to economic processes in order to increase productivity 
and add value to economic activity. As such, it is the engine of long-term economic 
growth and development, and the major source of productivity growth and rising 
living standards (OECD 2005: 46-52, 2015: 3-4; BIS 2011: 1-2, 7-22). 

Skills are critical for innovation (Lloyd-Ellis and Roberts 2002; BIS 2011: 111-14; 
2017: 97-119; Makkonen and Lin 2012; 2015: 13-14). Most obviously, highly-
qualified research scientists and engineers make a vital contribution to the research 
and development through which new ideas are developed. Academics and policy-
makers have therefore devoted a good deal of attention—perhaps, it might be 
argued, too much attention—to the high-level skills needed for work of this kind 
(Tether et al. 2005; Toner 2011). Good managerial skills are also critical for ensuring 
the effective use of new knowledge and novel technologies (BIS 2012: 24-25; DBEIS 
2018: 22). But there is another category of worker who also makes an important 
contribution to innovation, namely technicians. Technicians are workers occupying 
roles that require ‘intermediate’—that is, level 3-5—skills in science, technology, 
engineering and/or mathematics. The category encompasses both ‘skilled trades’, 
such as laboratory technician and maintenance engineer, and also ‘associate 
professional/technical’ roles (which include some varieties of manufacturing 
technician and production engineer) (Jagger et al. 2010; Mason 2012).1

Technicians use their knowledge of science, technology, engineering and 
mathematics to solve practical problems arising in research and development, 
production, and maintenance. This report will explore how technicians deploy 
their skills and knowledge to contribute to innovation. As we will see, technicians 
make critical contributions both to the development of new technology and 
also to its effective deployment and use. The report will also investigate the 
role of the organisations involved in technician training in helping to ensure that 
innovative firms have the skills they need to develop and exploit the potential 
of new technology. In this way, the report explores one important but hitherto 
largely neglected set of organisations that helps to shape an economy’s capacity to 
innovate, namely those connected with vocational education and training. It will be 
argued that in the case of the United Kingdom, deficiencies in the rules governing 
the provision of vocational education and training mean that that firms cannot 
always obtain the skilled technician labour they need to develop and utilise new 
technologies to good effect, impeding their ability to innovate.

1 More detailed descriptions of such roles, drawn from the space, composites, and industrial biotechnology sectors, can be 
found in Lewis 2012b: 11-20, 2013b: 15-26, and 2016a: 14-29.

7
The structure of the report is as follows. Section 2 explores the meaning of the 
term ‘innovation’, while Section 3 sets out the main theoretical framework currently 
used to analyse and guide policy on innovation, namely the innovation systems 
approach. Section 4 discusses innovation policy. Section 5 draws on the previous 
sections by using them to provide a framework for analysing the contributions 
technicians made to innovation and the scope for policy to ensure that firms are 
able to access the skilled technicians they need if they are to innovate. Section 6 
summarises and draws conclusions.

8
2. INNOVATION 

Innovation is the process whereby new technologies are created and diffuse 
throughout the economy so as to create new commercially-viable products and 
novel methods of producing existing goods and services (OECD 1997a: 47, OECD 
2005: 46-52; BIS 2011: 1, 7-22). 

Two broad kinds of innovation may be distinguished: 
•  radical innovation involves the creation of entirely new products and 

technologies that transform existing markets and/or industries, usually based on 
the creation of new knowledge through research; and 

•  incremental innovation involves the gradual improvement of existing products 

and technologies, often through knowledge creation in the workplace  
(BIS 2011: 2, 30-31).

On this view, innovation involves not only the invention of completely new ideas 
but also the application of existing ideas by firms that have not hitherto employed 
them, so that they are deployed in workplaces to transform practice in the relevant 
organisation, thereby diffusing more widely through the economy.2 

An important theoretical framework for understanding innovation, which is 
influential both in academia and also among policy-makers, is the innovation 
systems approach.3 The key insight is that the extent and kind of innovation 
occurring in an economy is crucially shaped by the rules governing how firms 
and other organisations involved in innovation interact with one another. Under 
the influence of this approach, as we shall see, those rules have become a central 
focus of attention, both among academics striving to understand the determinants 
of innovation and also on the part of policy-makers seeking to improve the 
performance of their economies. It is upon this approach that the next section of 
this report will focus.

2 Put slightly differently, the technology whose diffusion constitutes innovation need only be ‘new to the user’ and not necessarily 
‘new’ or ‘advanced’ in any wider sense.
3 The seminal contributions were written in the late 1980s and early 1990s. They included Christopher Freeman’s 1987 book 
on  Technology  Policy  and  Economic  Performance:  Lessons  from  Japan,  along  with  three  volumes  edited  by  Dosi  et  al.  (1988), 
Lundvall (1992), and Nelson (1993). A slightly later milestone was the publication in 1997 of a volume edited by Edquist, in 
which a group of authors sought to reframe the ideas advanced in the earlier studies in a conceptually unified way.

9
3.  THE INNOVATION SYSTEMS APPROACH

One of the main factors encouraging the development of this literature was 
dissatisfaction with ‘linear’ views of innovation and technological change (Sharif 
2006; Weber and Truffer 2017: 103-04). We shall consider first the critique of 
the linear view of innovation, before going on to explain the innovation systems 
approach to which that critique gave rise. 

3.1 LINEAR VERSUS NON-LINEAR VIEWS OF INNOVATION
According to the ‘linear’ view, innovation essentially involves a fixed sequence of 
activities, whereby new knowledge is created through basic scientific research and 
is then applied to create novel products and production processes. (Bush 1945). 
On this view, scientific progress is the principal cause of economic progress, so that 
the main policy challenge is that of catalysing scientific activity, whose economic 
benefits would—it was thought—be realised more or less automatically (Smith 
2000: 85-86, 92-93; Weber and Truffer 2017: 103). 

However, it is now widely accepted that innovation does not follow a simple ‘linear’ 
path from fundamental to applied research and thence to the development of new 
products and processes at a commercial scale. On the contrary, evidence suggests 
that innovation is a non-linear process, characterised by complicated feedback 
mechanisms and interactive relations involving science, technology, production, and 
use. Two stylised facts support this non-linear view. 

First, case studies indicate that, far from always involving the application of given 
scientific knowledge, technological innovations have in fact often taken place before 
the development of the relevant scientific theory, being based on practical rather 
than scientific knowledge. Indeed, by drawing attention gaps in basic knowledge, 
technological developments have at times driven the growth of science, as for 
example when thermodynamics was developed to understand the factors 
determining the efficiency of steam engines, or when advances in solid state physics 
took place as scientists strove to understand how the first transistors worked. 
Far from being something that occurs autonomously, therefore, the development 
of scientific knowledge is often stimulated by the need to understand already-
existing technologies. On this view, technological developments occurring in the 
later stages of the innovation process can help to shape basic scientific research, 
undermining the linear model’s claim that scientific advances always precede and 
drive technological change (Rosenberg 1983: 141-59; Nelson and Rosenberg 1993: 
6-9; Dosi and Nelson 2018: 42-43).

Second, the evidence also shows that requests and recommendations made by 
actual and/or potential users of new products and technologies, especially early 
or ‘lead’ users, are often fed back into the research process through which those 
products and technologies are developed. Related to this, suggestions made 
by salespeople who try to find buyers for new products and equipment are 
incorporated into research and development, again informing the learning involved 
in innovation (Rosenberg 1982: 193-241; Lundvall 1988; von Hippel 1988, 2005; 
Dosi and Nelson 2018: 46-47, 67-68).4

4   We  will  consider  a  third  example  of  such  feedback  from  the  later  to  the  earlier  stages  of  the  process  through  which 
innovation takes place below, when we consider how the technicians who install and operate new technology can also make 
important contributions to innovation.

10
What these stylised facts indicate is that the learning through which the new 
knowledge involved in innovation is generated derives not just from pure scientific 
research but also from several other sources, located at various stages in the 
innovation process (rather than just at its outset). Contrary to the linear view, 
therefore, innovation appears to be a complex, non-linear, interactive process 
of knowledge creation, characterised by complicated feedback mechanisms and 
interactive relations involving science, technology, production, and use (Kline and 
Rosenberg 1986; Edquist 1991: 1, 13, 16; Fagerberg 2017: 499-502). 

A significant implication of this non-linear model is that innovation involves 
interactions between firms and several other kinds of actor (including customers 
and organisations involved in scientific knowledge creation, such as universities 
and government research institutes). Those other organisations serve as sources 
of the information, finance, skills, and other resources required for new knowledge 
to be developed and to diffuse through the economy. And if innovation involves 
interactions between a variety of organisations, then in order to understand it, it 
will be necessary to analyse the rules that govern those interactions and thereby 
shape knowledge creation and diffusion. The theoretical perspective that has been 
developed to understand those interactions, and the rules that structure them, is 
known as the innovation systems approach. 

3.2 THE INNOVATION SYSTEMS APPROACH
When firms innovate, they rarely if ever act in isolation. Rather, they interact with 
other organisations in order to generate, acquire, and develop the knowledge used 
in innovation. Those organisations will often be other firms; but they also include 
universities, banks, government departments, regulatory agencies, venture capital 
funds, technical standards institutions, schools, and other providers of education 
and training, to name but a few. Those organisations act as sources of knowledge, 
finance, skills, and other kinds of resource, thereby contributing to the process 
through which innovation takes place.

The organisations in question, along with the rules governing their interactions, 
constitute what is known as an innovation system (Edquist 1997a, 1997b; BIS 2011: 2, 
10, 28-30; President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology 2014: 2, 18). 
As one of the founders of the innovation systems approach, Bengt-Åke Lundvall, 
has put it, “A system of innovation is constituted by elements and relationships 
which interact in the product, diffusion and use of new and economically useful 
knowledge” (Lundvall, 1992: 2). In a similar vein, another prominent contributor to 
the literature, Charles Edquist, has stated that, “Innovation processes … occur in 
interaction between institutional and organisational elements which together may 
be called ‘systems of innovation’” (1997a: xiii). The elements or parts of the system 
are the organisations that contribute to innovation; while the institutions are the 
rules that govern how those organisations interact with each other. The institutions 
or rules in question include: 

•  financial rules, such as accounting standards (which govern how organisations’ 

financial performance will be evaluated) and the rules of corporate 
governance (which specify the terms on which funding will be provided to the 
organisations that play a part in innovation); 

11
•  legal rules, relating to contracts, employment and perhaps most notably 

intellectual property (which concerns who owns the new technologies being 
developed, who is allowed to use them and on what terms, and who is 
entitled to the income they generate);

•  regulatory rules governing the kind of research that can take place and 

production methods that can be used; 

•  risk-management rules;

•  rules governing the application of various kinds of technical standards; 

•  environmental, and health and safety, regulations, which influence the demand 

for certain kinds of technology; 

•  rules governing public procurement, which also help to shape the demand for 

innovative technologies and goods; and 

•  educational rules, governing for example the terms on which government 

support will be given to organisations that engage in various kinds of training. 

By structuring how firms interact with each other, and with the other organisations 
that contribute to the innovation process, these institutions or rules are an 
important influence on the quantity and kind of innovation—understood as 
learning about new products and methods of production—that takes place 
(Lundvall and Johnson 1994). As summarised by one of the pioneers of the 
innovations system approach, Stan Metcalfe, a system of innovation is “that set of 
institutions [rules] which jointly and individually contribute to the development 
and diffusion of new technologies ... As such it is a system of interconnected 
[organisations] to create, store and transfer the knowledge, skills and artefacts 
which define new technologies” (Metcalfe 1995: 38).5 

The key question that may be asked of such systems concerns the extent to 
which they generate the information and incentives required to encourage and 
enable firms successfully to innovate by accumulating and putting into practice at 
a commercial scale new products and methods of production. Considering this 
question gives rise to the issue of what role, if any, there is for government policy 
to support innovation. As we shall see, the innovation systems approach gives rise 
to a distinctive set of arguments in favour of government intervention, including 
concerning vocational education and training.

5  Also see: Freeman 1987: 1; Lundwall 1992: 9, 12; Edquist and Johnson 1997; Smith 1997; Woolthius et al., 2005: 610-11; 
Edquist 2005: 182, 187-88; Metcalfe 2007: 447-48.

12
4. INNOVATION POLICY:   
THE ‘SYSTEM THEORETIC’ RATIONALE FOR 
GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION TO SUPPORT THE 
DIFFUSION OF NEW TECHNOLOGIES

The innovation systems literature focuses on how the rules governing the 
interactions between firms and other organisations constrain and enable innovation. 
This approach gives rise to the notion of ‘system failure’, which is quite distinct from 
the conventional notion of market failure associated with neoclassical economics.

The best-known rationale for government intervention to support innovation is 
provided by standard, neoclassical economics and is based on the old, linear view of 
innovation (according to which new knowledge is created through basic scientific 
research and then applied, more or less automatically, to develop novel products 
and processes). The neoclassical approach suggests that, if the process of scientific 
knowledge creation that (on this account) drives innovation is left to market forces, 
then too little knowledge creation—and, therefore, too little innovation—will take 
place. The reason is that the benefits arising from knowledge creation are enjoyed 
not only by those actors who actually create that knowledge in the first place 
but also by third parties who subsequently acquire it. However, in deciding how 
much to invest in knowledge creation, private sector actors only take into account 
the returns they themselves receive from their investment, ignoring the external 
benefits accruing to third parties. The resultant divergence between the private 
and social returns to knowledge creation—or externality, as economists term 
it—implies that private actors have what is from the point of view of society as a 
whole too weak an incentive to invest in generating new knowledge, so that too 
little knowledge creation, and therefore too little innovation, take place (Nelson 
1959; Arrow 1962; also see Smith 2000: 84-85; Chaminde and Edquist 2010: 97-99; 
Edler and Fagerberg 2017: 6-8; and Dosi and Nelson 2018: 50-57).

This ‘market failure’ provides a rationale for government intervention designed 
to raise the level of investment in research and development up to the socially 
optimal level. A number of different policies might be used, including: direct 
government production of knowledge, via publicly-funded research institutes; the 
use of subsidies for research in non-governmental research institutions such as 
universities; and the establishment of a system of patents to protect the intellectual 
property created by R&D. This ‘public good’ type justification for government 
intervention remains influential in policy circles (DBIS 2014: 11-14; Government 
Economic Service 2014: 9-10).

System failures arise when there is a failure to disseminate the information and 
other resources, and to coordinate the activities, required to ensure that new 
technologies are developed and diffuse properly through the economy. This 
may be because some of the relevant organisations or elements of the system 
are absent, or because some of the connections linking them are missing or 
inadequate, so that the informational and other resources required for innovation 
are not available in sufficient quantities. As one prominent contributor to this 
literature has put it, “A system may fail to operate in the desired way because 
knowledgeable actors are missing, because connections are absent or because 
system boundaries are drawn in the wrong place. Attention to these issues 

13
provides the basic rationale for innovation systems policy” (Metcalfe 2007: 447; 
also see Metcalfe 2005: 54-63, 2007: 447-48; Smith 2000: 93-100; Edler and 
Fagerberg 2017: 5, 8-10; Weber and Truffler 2017: 112).

For instance, if the legal rules governing intellectual property are too lax, then 
organisations may doubt that they will earn a sufficient return on their investment 
in developing new products and production techniques, deterring them from 
making such investments and thereby deterring innovation. But if the rules are too 
harsh, then the diffusion of knowledge required for innovation will be impeded. 
To take a second example, if a country’s system of corporate governance—the 
rules governing the provision of finance and the possibility of takeovers—is such 
that firms rely heavily on equity capital and have to focus on the short-run price of 
their shares, then they may be reluctant to undertake the long-term investments 
required to support innovative activities (Woolthius et al., 2005: 613; BIS 2011: 29).6 

The possibility of such ‘systemic’ problems implies a possible role for the state, not 
just in correcting market failures, but in improving the institutional framework—the 
set of rules—within which innovation takes place (Metcalfe 2007: 448-52; Edler 
and Fagerberg 2017: 9-10). Just as system failures may reflect the fact that some 
of the relevant organisations may be missing entirely, or that they are governed by 
rules that discourage them from doing what is required to generate and use new 
technologies, so too there are two broad sets of policy responses:

•  policy can focus on the organisations that are the elements in the system, 

through the creation of ‘missing’ organisations or by building their individual 
capabilities to develop and exploit innovations; or 

•  it can focus on the rules governing how those organisations interact with each 
other—i.e., it can focus on the connections between the elements, rather 
than the elements themselves—by seeking to bring the different organisations 
together to facilitate more effective development, diffusion, and use of 
knowledge (Edler and Fagerberg 2017: 5; Fagerberg 2017: 502). 

The innovation systems literature has acquired a significant following among policy-
makers, not least because of its adoption by the OECD (1997b, 1999, 2002). It has 
also received attention from policy-makers in the UK (see, for example, BIS 2011: 
10, 28-30; DBIS 2014: 11-26; GES Group on Growth 2014; Hauser 2014: 10, 45). 
As least part of its appeal derives from the fact that—compared to neoclassical 
approaches to policy—it encompasses a greater range of influences on innovation 
and so affords policy-makers a wider scope for possible policy intervention 
(Mytelka and Smith 2002; Sharif 2006; Weber and Truffler 2017: 106-09).

6  We shall explore in greater detail below a training-related example of system failure.

14
5.  THE INNOVATION SYSTEMS APPROACH AND 
TECHNICAL EDUCATION

An important influence on innovation is a country’s education system, which is 
a key element in shaping the economy’s ability to generate the skills required to 
develop and make effective use of new technologies (Nelson 1992: 351, 358-59; 
Metcalfe 2005: 68-69, 2007: 449-50; BIS 2011: 5, 29-30, 111-17). However, while 
contributions to the innovation systems literature occasionally mention vocational 
education and training, and the organisations through which it is provided, attention 
tends to be concentrated primarily on universities and graduates (see, for example, 
Nelson and Rosenberg 1993: 13; Edquist 1997b: 20; Edquist and Johnson 1997: 47; 
Edler and Fagerberg 2017: 11-13; Fagerberg 2017: 504).

This gap in the literature has not gone unnoticed. For instance, Edquist (2005: 
195) has observed that there is “little systematic knowledge about the ways in 
which the organization of education and training influences the development, 
diffusion and use of innovations”. Similarly, Shapira et al. (2010: 462) remark that 
“innovation scholars have hardly addressed the educational system. Research 
in the requirements the knowledge society asks from the education system is 
scarce.” In a survey of work on the relationship between skills and innovation, 
Jones and Grimshaw note that while those two factors are commonly held to be 
key determinants to economic growth, “there is a surprisingly limited appreciation 
of how these core features combine and interact both at the firm level and at 
the interface between tertiary education and industry … for the most part the 
training/skill-innovation inter-linkages remain under-researched” (2012: 3; also see 
p. 7). One key question, they suggest, concerns the relative merits of high-level, 
tertiary education as opposed to intermediate, vocational education for innovation 
(Jones and Grimshaw 2012: 3, 6-7). Most recently, Borras and Edquist (2015: 225) 
refer to “important gaps in the literature that warrant further research efforts in 
the near future” such as “the lack of empirical studies that look at the effects of 
vocational education and training schemes.” Finally, two authors of a recent paper 
on the link between university education and innovation note that, “[I]n focusing on 
firms, investors, and elite research institutions, innovation scholars have neglected 
the dynamics of skills and the key role of educational institutions” (Vona and 
Consoli 2014: 1395).

5.1 INNOVATION AND THE INSTITUTIONS GOVERNING TECHNICAL 
EDUCATION
The aim of this section of the report is to begin to help fill that gap in the 
literature, by examining the importance of technician skills and training in 
developing the capacity of firms to innovate, and the role of organisations involved 
in vocational education and training in supplying those technicians. As noted above, 
technicians are workers occupying roles that require ‘intermediate’ skills in science, 
technology, engineering and/or mathematics. They use their knowledge of those 
disciplines, and related practical skills, to solve practical problems arising in research 
and development, production, and maintenance. 

15
The following section of this report will explore both the contribution that 
technicians make to innovation and also the role of the organisations involved in 
technician training, along with the rules governing their behaviour, in helping or 
impeding efforts to ensure that innovative firms have the technicians they need to 
develop and exploit the potential of new technology. 

5.2  THE CONTRIBUTION OF TECHNICIANS TO INNOVATION
This section considers two key ways in which technicians can contribute to 
innovation. The first concerns how technicians contribute to what is known as 
the absorptive capacity of firms (that is, to firms’ ability to understand and make 
effective use of new knowledge about products and production processes). The 
second concerns the contribution that technicians can make to the generation of 
new knowledge about products and methods of production. 

5.2.1 Absorptive capacity
The term ‘absorptive capacity’ refers to “the ability of a firm to recognise the value 
of new, external information, assimilate it, and apply it to commercial ends” (Cohen 
and Leninthal 1990: 128; also see Zahra and George 2002). A firm’s absorptive 
capacity is therefore its ability to understand and make effective use of new 
knowledge and innovative technologies. One of the key determinants of absorptive 
capacity is the technical skills and knowledge of a firm’s workforce (Cohen and 
Levinthal 1990: 129-33; Jones and Grimshaw 2012: 4, 20-16: 113; Government 
Economic Service 2014: 3 n. 1, 20, 24-25; Mason et al., 2017). The capacity for 
successful innovation—and, in particular, for the successful commercialisation of 
new technology—depends upon employers having workers who can deploy and 
use that technology to good effect, thereby helping to ensure that its potential 
is realised. While highly qualified engineers and scientists are likely to play a very 
significant part in identifying the relevant knowledge in the first place, evidence 
indicates that technician-level workers also make important contributions to firms’ 
efforts to apply that knowledge successfully in the workplace. More specifically, 
it is possible to distinguish between potential absorptive capacity, defined as the 
ability to identify and acquire relevant external knowledge of new technologies, 
and realised absorptive capacity, which refers to the ability to apply that knowledge 
to good effect within the organisation (Zahra and George 2002). This distinction 
parallels that between ‘exploration’, understood as the search for new technologies 
and ‘exploitation’, centrally involving the application and refinement of known 
technologies, drawn by March (1991). It is to a firm’s realised absorptive capacity 
that technicians mainly contribute (Mason et al. 2017: 8).

The reason is straightforward; the effective deployment of technology to bring 
about improved operational performance depends upon the ability of technicians 
to install, adapt, operate, trouble-shoot, and maintain the technology in question. A 
few illustrative examples are as follows:

•  Technicians are involved in the installation, commissioning, maintenance and 
improvement of plant and facilities in the chemical industry and in industrial 
biotechnology (Lewis 2013: 13-15, 2016a: 20-22, 25).

•  In the automotive industry, technicians play a critical role in helping firms 
realise the potential for changes in technology and work organisation to 
reduce costs and improve output quality (Mason and Wagner 2005).

16
•  In the garment industry, machine operators who are more skilled at reading 

technical drawings take less time, and require less supervisory assistance, when 
putting a new style into production (Prais 1995: 69).

A firm’s absorptive capacity will be greater if its technicians have broader, 
occupationally-oriented skills, coupled with a sound grasp of the relevant 
theoretical principles, rather than narrow, job-specific skills with little underpinning 
knowledge. Technicians with a wider range of skills and good underpinning 
knowledge are better placed to incorporate the use of new technology into their 
routines and thereby to facilitate its effective use (Tether et al., 2005: 6-7, 60-61; 
Toner 2011: 47). Evidence indicates that higher-level technician skills in particular 
make a significant contribution to firms’ performance in the area of innovation, by 
enabling them to exploit new knowledge (Mason et al., 2017).

If there is a shortage of technicians, if their skills are tailored to the requirements 
of a specific role, or if they lack a good grounding in the relevant theoretical 
knowledge, then the technician workforce will be ill-equipped to adapt to new 
technologies and to exploit their potential to the full. In such cases, firms will have 
poor absorptive capacity, suffering from a deficient capability to innovate because 
they do not have enough appropriately trained and educated technicians to make 
the best use of new technologies. Some examples of the kinds of problems that 
can arise include the following:

•  Difficulties with the technician workforce have in the past made it hard 

for firms in the UK automotive industry to respond to the advent of new 
technology and the demands created by the restructuring of supply chains, 
leading to slower innovation and lower productivity and competitiveness than 
would otherwise have been the case (Mason and Wagner 2005). 

•  Matched-plant studies have shown that historically British engineering firms 

have been slower than their German counterparts to use new equipment, and 
have tended to use simpler models, because deficiencies in the skills of their 
technician workforce mean that managers are not confident of their workers’ 
ability to make good use of new technology. Such firms suffer from a deficient 
capacity to absorb new knowledge and innovative technologies, leading to 
slower innovation and lower productivity and competitiveness (Prais 1995).

•  Firms in the advanced manufacturing sector that wish to shift from the use of 
metallic to composite components have struggled to recruit workers skilled at 
working with composite materials, hampering their efforts to make effective 
use of innovative, composite-based methods of production (Lewis 2012a: 21-
22, 38, 2013b: 33-35).

•  Similarly, organisations in a variety of industries that are seeking to replace 

methods of production based on chemical synthesis with the use of biological 
substances and processes have noted the difficulties caused by a lack of 
manufacturing technicians with the relevant skills (Lewis 2016a: 31-32).

17
In all such cases, to use the language of the innovation system approach, the 
interactions between firms and the organisations involved in vocational education 
and training are deficient in some key respect, implying that firms cannot obtain 
the skilled technician labour they need to develop and use new technologies to 
good effect (DBIS 2014: 22-23). We shall elaborate below on this notion of system 
failure in the case of vocational education and training. Before doing so, however, 
we shall consider two more ways in which technicians contribute to innovation, in 
addition to facilitating the diffusion of new technologies, both of which involve them 
contributing to the creation of the new knowledge upon which innovation is based.

5.2.2 Technician-driven (bottom-up) innovation 
Evidence suggests that, in addition to playing a key role in putting new 
technologies to good use, technicians also make a direct, and important, 
contribution, to the creation of the knowledge that informs both radical and 
incremental innovation. 

5.2.2.1 Radical innovation
Studies of R&D indicate that while highly qualified research scientists and 
engineers play the principal role in the creation of the knowledge involved in 
radical innovation, technicians also make a significant contribution in two ways. 

First, technicians make a direct contribution to knowledge creation by designing 
and building many of the instruments and experimental rigs involved in research. 
Researchers often do not provide the technicians with detailed technical drawings 
of the kind of instrument or apparatus required to bring the experimental part 
of the research projects to a successful conclusion. On the contrary, they often 
provide technicians with no more than a rough sketch of the kind of instrument 
or apparatus required to solve the technical problems that arise in the course of 
their research. It is then up to the technicians to draw on their knowledge and 
practical expertise of engineering—their knowledge of the properties of different 
kinds of material and their understanding of what particular tools can be used to 
achieve—along with their general problem-solving skills in order to design and 
build the requisite instrument or experimental apparatus. The process through 
which the final design of the experimental apparatus or instrument emerges 
is therefore perhaps best described as a dialogue or iterative process in which 
researchers and technicians work as a team in order to develop the instrument 
or experimental apparatus required to give practical effect to researchers’ 
ideas. Through such informal interaction with researchers, technicians make an 
invaluable, if all-too often unheralded, contribution to research (Toner at al. 2010: 
3-5; Lewis and Gospel 2011: 16-17; Herrmann and Peine 2011: 698).

Second, technicians’ experience of operating and maintaining machinery, and of 
manufacturing products, affords them important practical knowledge of what 
designs work well and which give rise to problems. This information enables 
technicians to provide advice to the scientists and engineers involved in R&D 
about which designs are likely to work well and so should be adopted and which 
will be hard to realise in practice and so should be dropped. Some examples of 
the kind of contribution technicians can make are as follows:

18
•  In industries that use composites materials, technicians’ experience of how 
work is actually carried out on the shop floor—and, in particular, their 
awareness of the difficulties that can arise in realising certain kinds of design—
enables them to provide valuable advice and feedback to ostensibly better 
qualified, but in terms of hands-on laminating often less knowledgeable, 
graduate engineers about how to design components in ways that make them 
as easy to manufacture as possible. For example, one high-end automotive 
company reported that it had greatly improved the process through which 
new composite components were made by having technicians in its design 
office who ‘have a feel for’ what composite materials can and cannot be made 
to do and what kinds of design can be made quickly and reliably and which 
cannot (Lewis 2013b: 22-23).

•  Skilled technicians play a key role in the development of new goods by 
high-end producers of kitchen and tableware such as Alessi, by acting as 
intermediaries between designers and manufacturing engineers in order to 
ensure that the designs chosen can readily be manufactured (BIS 2011: 16-17; 
D’Ippolito 2014: 1335, 1343-44).

•  An organisation involved in the maintenance, repair and overhaul of 

commercial aircraft described how its technicians pointed out to a chartered 
design engineer that the repair he had designed for an aircraft structure would 
not be feasible, because in practice the pipes and wiring looms on the aircraft 
precluded the kind of access needed to effect it (Lewis 2012a: 9).

These examples illustrate how technicians make their own distinctive contribution 
to the knowledge creation required for R&D. This is of course consistent with the 
non-linear view of innovation; rather than simply implementing ideas developed by 
the scientists and engineers involved in R&D, technicians draw on their knowledge 
of what designs can be turned into reality at later stages of the innovation process 
to feed back on and inform underlying research and development.

These examples have important implications for the organisation of work in 
organisations carrying out R&D, namely that firms seeking to innovate should not 
leave their R&D department to operate in isolation from their manufacturing 
operation, lest they end up designing products that do not lend themselves to 
manufacturing in a straightforward way. As Cohen and Levinthal (1990: 134) put it: 
“a process in which one unit [R&D] simply hands off the design to [another unit] is 
likely to suffer greater difficulty” than one where R&D and manufacturing and work 
together, with technicians incorporated into R&D departments (also see Toner et 
al. 2010: viii-xi, 28).

5.2.2.2 Incremental innovation
It is also increasingly widely recognised that, in addition to contributing to and 
facilitating the diffusion of radical innovations, technicians also play a key role in 
incremental innovation (that is, the gradual improvement of existing products and 
technologies). In the words of the historian of technology Nathan Rosenberg, 
incremental innovations “involve endless minor modifications and improvements in 
existing products, each of which is of small significance but which, cumulatively, are of 
major significance” (Rosenberg, 1994: 14-15). They require an “intimate familiarity with 
the minutiae of the productive sequence” of the kind technicians acquire through 
their experience of installing, operating, maintaining, adapting, and solving problems 

19
with, the machines and processes in which technology is embodied (Rosenberg 1982: 
122). In performing their duties, therefore, technicians learn how the technologies 
in question can be improved, enabling them to contribute to the creation of the 
knowledge that gives rise to incremental innovation. Such incremental innovation is 
highly significant, suggesting another important route through which technicians have 
an important contribution to make to innovation (HØyrup 2010: 144, 149; Toner 
2010: 78-79, 2011: 3, 26-29; also see Dahlman and Nelson, 1995: 95). 

The degree to which a firm’s workforce actively engages in such bottom-up, 
incremental innovation is strongly influenced by the way in which work is organised, 
in particular by the extent to which technicians are allowed and encouraged to 
make suggestions for how technology can be improved (Høyrup 2010: 150; Toner 
2011: 3; Jones and Grimshaw 2016: 110). The organisational policies which facilitate 
technician-driven innovation often fall under the heading of ‘high-performance work 
systems’ (HPWS). These can be defined as organisational practices and arrangements 
that enhance a firm’s capacity for making incremental improvements to the efficiency 
of its work processes and to the quality of its products and services (Arundel et al. 
2006: 1178-79; Toner 2011: 53). Features of HPWS include the following:

•  broad-based job descriptions and occupationally-oriented training which, when 
coupled with extensive job rotation, increases both the flexibility of workers 
and also their capacity to understand the production process and thereby 
contribute to its improvement;

•  the granting of significant autonomy to workers involved in production, so that 
they have the scope to act on their practical knowledge of how production 
might be improved;

•  the development of trust between workers and management, so that the former 

are willing to advance their ideas for how improvements can be made; and

•  rewards in the firm of bonus payments and/or enhanced prospects for 

promotion when the active participation of front-line workers in innovation 
leads to improvements.

These HRM practices are often complementary or mutually reinforcing in 
the sense that the impact of any one of them is greater if it is combined with 
others than if it is adopted in isolation. For instance, autonomy and training are 
complementary because affording workers the opportunity to take the initiative in 
making incremental improvements in production is typically more effective if they 
have the skills and knowledge required to identify and enact such improvements 
(Michie and Sheehan 1999; Laursen and Foss 2003; Jensen et al. 2007: 684; Toner 
2011: 54-56; Sung and Ashton 2015: 134-69; OECD 2017: 11, 74-75). 

What the evidence reported in this section suggests, therefore, is that the 
knowledge creation involved in innovation is no longer regarded as the exclusive 
preserve of people educated at graduate level and above, working in R&D facilities, 
but rather is conceptualised as issuing from several levels of the workforce, 
including technicians. The practical experience gained by technicians in carrying out 
their duties can be harvested and made explicit, leading to a change in the firm’s 
working routines so that technology is better used. This is, of course, of a piece 

20
with the non-linear model of innovation described above, in which the learning 
that gives rise to innovation is generated not just from pure scientific but also from 
several other sources of the process through which new technologies come to be 
developed and deployed, including the production stage in which technicians are so 
intimately involved (Jensen et al. 2007; HØyrup 2010: 151-53; Toner 2010: 78). 

This type of analysis arguably leads to the view that the scope of public policy ought 
to extend beyond a focus on the supply of skills towards a concern with how skills 
are deployed in the workplace and, in relation to this, with employers’ demand for 
skills. For if the impact of an increase in skills on innovation is contingent on the 
other practices adopted by firms, such as how they organise work and whether 
they adopt a low skill/low cost/low value business strategy, competing principally on 
the basis of price, or a high skill/high cost/high value one, competing on the basis 
of quality, then it might be argued that government ought to encourage business 
strategies and forms of work organisation that mobilise high levels of skill and high 
value added (Finegold and Soskice 1988; Ramstad 2009; Campbell 2012: 33-35; 
Keep and Mayhew 2014; Keep 2013; Sung and Ashton 2015).

5.3.  TECHNICAL EDUCATION AND SYSTEM FAILURES
In this section we draw on the notion, outlined above, of ‘system failure’ to 
analyse some of the problems that can arise when the organisations and rules 
governing the provision of vocational education and training fail to disseminate 
the information and other resources, and to coordinate the activities, required to 
develop the technician workforce needed to make good use of new technologies.

5.3.1 Education and training organisations, ‘skills systematisation’ and 
coordination failures
Standard human capital theory, on which the economic analysis of vocational 
education and training is based, typically assumes that education and training 
providers alter their offerings seamlessly to the availability of new technologies, 
however novel, and automatically offer the right kind of training to enable firms 
to build the absorptive capacity to exploit them (Nelson and Phelps 1966; 
DBIS 2014: 22-23). It therefore ignores the possibility that the organisations 
involved in education and training may fail to adjust their offerings appropriately, 
thereby hindering the adoption of the technology in question, with detrimental 
consequences for innovation, productivity and economic growth (Andreoni 2014: 
58, 60; Vona and Consoli 2014: 1394-95, 1400). 

 

Recent work has attempted to fill this gap by considering explicitly the role of 
educational organisations—such as schools, universities and training providers—in 
facilitating, or hampering, the development of the skills required to realise fully the 
potential of new technologies (Vona and Consoli 2014). Instead of simply assuming 
that such organisations seamlessly adjust their offerings to match the requirements 
of new methods of production, this literature examines the effectiveness of those 
organisations, and the rules governing their behaviour, in facilitating or hampering 
the development of the workforce required for the successful diffusion of new 
technology. As two of the researchers who have developed this approach put it, 
their goal “is to articulate in detail the link between the emergence of new skills 
closely tied to radical new technology and the adjustments that are made in formal 
education to reap the potential benefits of innovation” (Vona and Consoli 2014: 
1393; also see p. 1397). 

21
A key concept in this literature is that of ‘knowledge systematisation’, which is 
used as a conceptual device for connecting technology, organisations and human 
capital. Initially, as a new technology is first being developed, the activities associated 
with it tend to be complex, ill-structured, and the preserve of a small number of 
specialist researchers. The relevant knowledge is mostly tacit, and therefore difficult 
to transfer without personal interaction between those who already possess it 
and those attempting to acquire it. As the technology is developed, however, 
it becomes possible to articulate, systematise and standardise the production 
techniques in question, so that they can be reduced to a series of explicit, routine 
work instructions or standard operating procedures of the kind that can be carried 
out by a skilled technician (as required for the efficient scaling-up of production 
from an R&D facility or process development plant to full scale manufacturing).7 As 
this process of ‘knowledge systematisation’ takes place, the education system has 
an important role to play in ensuring the availability of the skills required for the 
effective exploitation of this developing technology. In particular, the organisations 
involved in education and training must offer the relevant programmes, so as 
to facilitate the training of workers with the skills required for the widespread 
exploitation of the new technology (Vona and Consoli 2014: 1394-99; also see 
Tether et al., 2005: 8, 97, Toner 2011: 29, and D’Ippolito et al. 2014: 1335-36).8

If they do not do so—if the relevant education and training organisations are 
absent, or if the institutional rules governing their behaviour are inappropriate—
then there arises the possibility of coordination failures, whereby the education 
system fails to align the accumulation of human and physical capital, focusing on one 
kind of skills (graduate, say) and neglecting others that are needed to exploit novel 
technology (for example, technician-level skills).9 Such coordination failures lead 
to structural mismatches between the stocks of physical and human capital. These 
manifest themselves along the lines described in Section 5.2.1 above and Section 
5.3.2 below, in problems such shortages of technicians, deficiencies in technician 
skills, and/or the use of over-qualified but under-skilled graduates in technician roles, 
that hamper the ‘absorption’ of new technologies and thereby inhibit productivity 
and economic growth (Amendola and Vona 2012: 633-34; Vona and Consoli 2014: 
1400-05; Andreoni 2014: 60-62, 65; Borras and Edquist 2012: 223; Smith 2010: 89-
90; Weber and Truffler 2017: 112). 

Failings of this kind are ‘systems failures’ in the sense in which that term is used in 
the innovation systems literature; the system of organisations and rules within which 
innovation occurs is inadequate to coordinate all the activities required to ensure 
that new technologies are developed and diffuse properly through the economy, in 
this case because the organisations governing vocational education and training do 
not supply firms with the specific types of human capital required to make best use 
of the technologies in question. Put slightly differently, if it is indeed the case that one 
of the attributes of a well-functioning innovation system is its “capability to ensure 
timely access by innovators to the relevant stocks of knowledge” (Smith 2000: 78), 
and if those stocks of knowledge including the practical and theoretical knowledge 
embodied in skilled workers at all levels, including technicians, then where the 

7 For discussions of this process in the case of cell therapy and regenerative medicine, see Eriksson and Webster (2015).
8  Earlier  analyses  of  technology-driven  economic  development  have  underlined  the  significance  of  supportive  educational 
institutions  in  facilitating  the  systematic  updating  of  educational  curricula  for  the  development  of  the  chemical  and  petro-
chemical industries (Nelson 1994; Rosenberg and Nelson 1994; David and Wright 1997). They have, however, tended to focus 
on the importance of universities rather than institutions involved in vocational education and training.
9  This is in addition to the possibility, long discussed in the literature on human capital, that there may be a market failure to 
invest adequately in skills due to employers’ fear of poaching (Stevens 1999; Lewis 2014a: 13-16). 

22
organisations involved in vocational education and training do not supply adequate 
numbers of skilled technicians the innovation system can be said to have failed 
because it is not providing firms with the right quantity, and blend, of practical and 
theoretical knowledge to make the best use of new technologies.

5.3.2 Systems failures in the UK: The case of technician skills for emerging technologies
There is evidence of coordination problems of the kind just described in the 
case of technician skills and training for emerging technologies in advanced 
manufacturing in the UK. Employers seeking to deploy new technologies in the 
space industry, in advanced therapies, in industries that make use of composite 
materials, and in industrial biotechnology all report significant difficulties 
in obtaining the skilled technician labour they need to deploy those new 
technologies effectively. For example, as noted above, space firms struggle to hire 
experienced, high-quality manufacturing technicians, as do employers in industrial 
biotechnology and the advanced therapies industry (Lewis 2012b: 25-26; 2016a: 
34-35). Employers in the aerospace and automotive industries who wish to make 
greater use of composite parts find it hard to recruit technician skilled at working 
with that material (Lewis 2012a: 21-22, 2013b: 33-35).10 These shortages impose 
limits on the absorptive capacity of firms.

Employers in some industries have responded to shortages of genuine 
technicians—and the abundance of science graduates produced by UK 
universities—by recruiting graduates to fill technician roles. This is especially 
common, for example, in the case of laboratory and manufacturing technician roles 
in the chemical industry, industrial biotechnology, and in cell therapy/regenerative 
medicine (Lewis 2013a: 16-18, Lewis 2016a: 17-20, 31-32; Lewis and Gospel 2015: 
10-11; House of Lords 2018: 23-25). This is a case of over-qualification; the level of 
education possessed by the graduates exceeds that required for the role.11 The use 
of graduates to fill such roles is often a mixed blessing, bringing short-term benefits 
in the form of cheap labour—the abundant supply of such workers produced by 
UK universities means that they can often be hired at relatively low wages—but 
also giving rise to two kinds of problem in the longer term. 

First, whilst graduates may possess a higher level of theoretical knowledge than 
is needed to fill a technician role, they are also often under-skilled, because they 
lack the practical skills required to apply that theoretical knowledge to good 
effect in the workplace and thus to do the job well. This is an example of what 
a recent study of over-qualification refers to as a “possibility which tends to get 
overlooked—that graduates are less capable in some occupations than the non-
graduates they are displacing” (Holmes and Mayhew 2015: 12). This is because 
certain skills are more effectively produced in the workplace through supervised 
practice, rather than in an academic institution. However, given labour market 
and societal pressures and government rhetoric and information, the sort of 
able young person who might once have gone down a work-based vocational 
learning route (and successfully entered a good occupation) opts instead to apply 
to university, and consequently fewer new labour market entrants have those 

10 This is against the background of more general evidence of shortages of skilled technicians (UKCES 2010a, 2010b, 2015: 66-
71; Adonis 2014: 6-9; HM Government 2017: 37-38, 48; OECD 2017: 26-27). Evidence indicates that the share of the workforce 
with technician or intermediate-level skills is significantly lower in the UK than in our major competitors (HM Treasury and 
Department of Business, Innovation and Skills 2011: 36; BIS 2015: 17).
11 Evidence indicates that the problem of over-qualification is significant both in absolute terms, with somewhere in the region 
of one quarter and one third of UK employees falling into that category (Chevalier and Lindley 2009; Green and Zhou 2010; 
UKCES 2015: 7, 57), and also that the scale of the problem is worse in the UK than in most other European nations (OECD 
2013: 171; Holmes and Mayhew 2015: 25-28).

23
particular skills. (Holmes and Mayhew 2015: 12; also see UKCES 2015: 46 and 
Jones and Grimshaw 2016: 109.)

Second, graduates often quickly become dissatisfied, both with the often mundane, 
highly routinised nature of much technician work and also with the relatively low 
wages they earn in such roles, and so often leave relatively soon after joining their 
employer. The combination of these two problems—a lack of practical skills, which 
implies that graduates require on-the-job training in practical skills, and high labour 
turnover amongst graduates in technician-level roles—is especially frustrating for 
employers who, having spent time and effort equipping the graduates with the 
practical skills required for technician roles, then see them leave before the firm 
enjoys a return on its investment.

What these findings suggest is that the UK education system is arguably producing 
the wrong mix of skills, with too many graduates and too few technicians being 
educated in some STEM disciplines. As a recent report House of Lords Report 
on the economics of post-school education described the situation, “There is a 
skills mismatch in the UK: despite the record numbers of the population with an 
undergraduate degree businesses are reporting a shortage of people with technical 
skills … Rather than a need for more STEM graduates … the greater shortages 
today appear to be for people with sub-degree qualifications … there is an acute 
shortage of technician-level STEM skills (House of Lords 2018: 15, 22; also see pp. 
5-8, 23-27, 42-53, National Audit Office 2016: 8, 18, 23-26, and OECD 2017).12 As 
noted above, this kind of mismatch is symptomatic of system failure, involving firms 
suffering from reduced absorptive capacity arising in this case because the rules 
governing the provision of different kinds of post-school education in the UK have 
encouraged too great a focus on graduates compared to technicians. 

Increasing numbers of employers in emerging industries are responding to the 
problems posed by shortages of technicians, and the shortcomings of graduates, by 
turning towards apprenticeship training.13 Where successful, this brings a number 
of benefits. A successful training scheme yields a supply of skilled workers to 
fill technician roles in the face of a paucity of skilled technicians on the external 
labour market, improving firms’ absorptive capacities. It also produces workers 
who, having enjoyed significant on-the-job training as well as off-the-job technical 
education, have good practical skills. Moreover, having come up via a ‘work-based’ 
route, ex-apprentices are less likely to be encumbered with unrealistic, graduate-
level expectations of what their job will involve. Finally, apprenticeship training 
gives employers an opportunity to shape their values (for example, about the 
standards to which work needs to be done). It also builds loyalty, as former trainees 
reciprocate the investment firms have made in them through greater commitment 
to their employer (Ryan et al. 2007: 140-41; Lewis 2012a: 29, 2012b 31-32). 

However, many of the employers who have attempted to train apprentices to 
work with emerging technologies have faced serious problems obtaining the 
requisite education and training. Two broad categories of difficulty can be identified. 

12 “The evidence suggests that there is a mismatch between the qualifications and skills provided by the higher education 
system and the needs of the labour market … The combination of incentives to offer and study for undergraduate degrees has 
had a negative effect on the provision and demand for other types of higher education … [T]he lack of sub-degree technical 
qualifications  has  led  to  a  mis-match  between  the  skills  attained  through  the  education  system  and  those  required  by  the 
economy” (House of Lords 2018: 9, 55).
13 An ‘apprenticeship’ is a contract between an employer and a young person that combines a structured programme of 
on-the-job training and productive work with part-time, formal technical education. Apprenticeship training, which is usually 
formally certificated, equips people with intermediate-level skills of the kind required by people who fill roles typically described 
as ‘Skilled Trades’ and ‘Technicians/Associate Professionals and Technical Occupations’ (Ryan et al. 2007: 129; Lewis 2014a: 1).

24
First, many of the organisations that are currently take apprentices, or are seriously 
thinking about doing so, have had difficulties obtaining the off-the-job technical 
education their apprentices require if they are to acquire the theoretical knowledge 
they need to do their job well. For example:

•  Employers in the space industry have struggled to find a local college 

or university willing to offer the off-the-job courses their manufacturing 
apprentices need (in particular, HNCs in electronics);

•  Employers in the composites sector have found it hard to find colleges willing 

to offer their apprentices modules in composites engineering;

•  Firms in industrial biotechnology have found it difficult to persuade local 

colleges to offer courses in the underpinning knowledge required by their 
laboratory technicians and, in the case of industrial biotechnology, their 
manufacturing technicians as well. 

Second, firms in the composites, industrial biotechnology, and cell therapy/
regenerative medicine industries have also struggled to persuade colleges to offer 
high-quality, up-to-date practical training for their apprentices so that they can learn 
how to use new methods of production. The problem here sometimes centres on 
a total absence of provision, as experienced by employers in the life sciences who 
wish their apprentices to receive training in cell cultivation under clean room/cGMP 
conditions; and sometimes—as in the case of employers with apprentice aircraft 
mechanics and composite technicians—on inadequate provision, delivered in poor 
facilities by lecturers unfamiliar both with the techniques and materials currently 
used in industry and also with current standards of good practice (Lewis 2012b: 
31-32, 2012b: 31-32, 2013b: 46-47; Lewis 2016a: 39-40).

The principal reason for these problems lies in what might be called ‘the tyranny 
of small numbers’. The total number of apprentices wanting to take the courses in 
question in the relevant geographical area is too small for it to be in the interest of 
colleges to offer them, given the high fixed costs of providing the training in question 
and the prevailing funding regime under which colleges and other providers operate. 
As Alison Wolf has explained, the rules governing apprenticeship funding encourages 
providers to focus provision on shorter, cheaper, lower-level (1-2) programmes, 
in subjects such as customer service and business administration, rather than the 
longer, more expensive, higher-level (3-5) apprenticeships required by employers in 
advanced manufacturing. This is so, Wolf argues, for two main reasons: first, because 
such courses are easier to pass, so that it is easier for providers to claim funding for 
them under the current ‘output-related’ funding system; and also, second, because 
for any given level of difficulty, if a provider offers a large number of shorter courses, 
then the risk of it suffering an unexpected shortfall of income because of an unusually 
high number of failures in any one group is reduced if that risk is spread over a larger 
number of cohorts (rather than a smaller number of groups on longer programmes). 
One might even say that there is a skills ‘valley of death’, whereby training providers 
struggle to develop commercially-viable programmes for emerging technologies in 
advanced manufacturing, akin to the technology ‘valley of death’ that thwarts efforts 
to commercialise the new technologies themselves.14 The upshot is a situation 
where training providers lack the incentive to offer the kinds of courses needed by 

14 The ‘valley of death’ is the term used to describe the phase of innovation between research and the initial generation of 
ideas, on the one hand, and their full-scale commercial exploitation, on the other (McKinsey Global Institute 2012: 136; Edler 
and Fagerberg 2017: 17).

25
employers in advanced manufacturing who wish to train apprentices to work with 
new manufacturing technologies (Wolf 2015: 5-6 9-12, 32; BIS 2015: 18 30-31; HM 
Government 2017: 39, 41-42; House of Lords 2018: 48-50, 74-75; York Consulting 
2018: i, 5-8; also see Toner 2010: 83, OECD 2017: 21-22, 51 and NASEM 2017 
106).15 This is another example of system failure, exemplifying the kinds of 
difficulties that can arise when the rules governing the behaviour of education and 
training providers discourage them from offering the programmes required by 
employers seeking to deploy new technologies. 

5.4  TECHNICIANS AND INNOVATION: A POSSIBLE SOLUTION
The evidence from several emerging sectors suggests, therefore, that the rules 
governing the relations between emerging manufacturing sectors and the 
educational system, in particular the system of vocational education and training, 
are flawed, in such a way that there are insufficient technicians with the skills 
required to facilitate the successful adoption of new technologies. What is required 
for successful innovation, in addition to the high-level scientific and engineering 
capability to develop new technologies, is a set of educational organisations and 
rules that will provide in a timely manner the technician skills needed to implement 
new technologies to good effect at commercial scale. Put slightly differently, the 
development of the technician workforce must take place in concert with, and be 
accorded the same priority as, technology development, rather than happening—as 
is all too often the case at present—as an afterthought.

Aside from undertaking a general reform of the funding regime governing FE 
colleges and other training providers (House of Lords 2018: 42-53), policy-makers 
could address this problem, and thereby help to ensure an adequate supply of 
skilled technicians for employers seeking to deploy innovative technologies in 
advanced manufacturing, by considering the following approach:

•  First, develop only a small number—one or two—of centres of excellence 
that offer the requisite training, located in areas where there is a significant 
concentration of the relevant kind of manufacturer.

•  Second, ensure that those organisations offer training via distance learning, 

supplemented by periodic residential courses or stints of block release, in order 
to extend their reach beyond the geographical area in which they are located 
(and including not just England but other parts of the United Kingdom).

•  Third, as far as possible design the training courses so that they are suitable 
not just for apprentices from one industry—cell therapy and regenerative 
medicine, say—but also for two other groups of people: (i) apprentices from 
other, closely related industries whose training requirements may be similar 
(e.g. biologics); and (ii) graduate recruits and ‘converts’ from other industries 
who, while they may have already received significant education and training, 
may still need additional instruction in the particular requirements of working 
with the new technology in question (e.g. chemical process operators who are 
moving into industrial biotechnology). This will further increase demand for 
the training programmes in question, increasing their financial viability (Lewis 

15  Wolf (2015: 32) highlights how most of the recent increase in apprentice numbers has been concentrated in low-cost areas, 
and also at below level 2 (also see Lanning 2016: 5-7). Field (2018: 52) reports that a smaller proportion of full-time students 
study higher-level (level 4/5) technical qualifications in the UK than in many other countries. For more general concerns about 
whether  the  incentives  that  encourage  the  FE  sector  to  provide  training  in  STEM  disciplines  are  sharp  enough,  see  Skills 
Commission (2011: 10-11, 23-27), Wolf (2011: 60), Westwood (2016: 47) and Sainsbury (2018: 7). 

26
2016b: 20; Lewis and Bradshaw 2017: 5). The importance of devising training 
programmes for existing workers is perhaps especially important in the case 
of the new skills required of workers in industries where manufacturing will 
be transformed by innovative digital technologies associated with (so-called) 
industry 4.0 (Maier 2017). Further research on this issue of the need to retrain 
the existing technician workforce so that are equipped with the skills required 
to deal with these developments is urgently required.

•  Fourth, reduce the initial financial outlay, and risks, associated with the 

provision of the practical component of the training by using existing facilities 
rather than building new ones. The use of existing facilities should reduce the 
size of the investment required to establish the training programmes because 
some of the relevant equipment and personnel will already be in place; and 
it will reduce the risk because the facilities can be used to generate income 
from sources other than training, such as research/process development work 
(Lewis 2016a: 44-45; Lewis 2016b: 20- 21).16

Establishing centres along the lines just described holds out the prospect of 
overcoming the workforce ‘valley of death’—akin to the technology valley of 
death—that arises at present because training providers fear that there will be 
insufficient demand for their services to warrant them incurring the high fixed 
costs of establishing the relevant facilities, etc. 

Prominent examples of the relevant kind of existing facility are to be found in the 
Catapult Centres.17 Some Catapults, such as the AMRC and MTC, have become 
involved in apprenticeship training to very good effect; but others have not (Lewis 
2014b; Burnett 2016; Perkins 2019: 52-53). Using the Catapults has at least two 
key advantages. First, it would make it possible to avoid the expense of setting up 
yet another new organisation, which would be wasteful and probably prohibitively 
costly in the current financial climate. Second, because Catapult Centres are 
involved in process development work, it should be relatively straightforward to 
ensure that training programmes and syllabuses are kept up to date and thereby 
remain attuned to the needs of industry (something that is especially important in 
an industry like cell therapy/regenerative medicine, where the pace of technological 
advance in manufacturing is rapid).

More specifically, it should be possible to follow the example of the one of the 
US Manufacturing Institutes, the American equivalent of the Catapult Centres, 
and develop within the Catapults so-called ‘expert educator’ teams to engage 
in the ‘skills systematisation’ required to develop a suitable technician workforce 

16  Employers  might  also  be  encouraged  to  support  the  workforce  development  efforts  of  such  centres,  for  example  by 
providing up-to-date equipment. This might reflect a wider notion of ‘employer leadership’ than is often used in the field of 
vocational education and training in the UK, where all too often that phrase is interpreted to mean little more than employers 
being able to choose from a menu of training programmes to whose provision they have contributed little. Far from being an 
act of charity, this can of course be in the interests of the firms in question. Not only will employers who contribute benefit 
from having a better-skilled workforce; in addition, equipment manufacturers who supply kit for the training facility are likely to 
benefit, not least because if firms cannot be confident that their workers know how to use and maintain a particular piece of 
equipment, they are unlikely to buy and use it. 
17 Catapult Centres are technology centres where universities, businesses and government work together to encourage the 
commercialisation of new technologies. Their goal is to reduce the risks associated with the development of such technologies, 
in  particular  by  providing  facilities  and  expertise  to  demonstrate  that  the  technologies  in  question  can  work  not  just  at 
the laboratory level but at full, commercial scale. In this way, by helping to solve some of the market failures that hamper 
the  commercialisation  of  new  technology,  they  can  help  firms  developing  new  technologies  to  pass  safely  through  the  so-
called ‘valley of death’ (that is, the phase of innovation between the initial generation of an idea and its full-scale commercial 
exploitation, through which many innovative technologies fail to pass) (TSB 2011; Hauser 2014: 10-16, 45-46). Other innovation 
centres, such as NPL and RAL, also arguably have the potential to play a similar role to Catapult Centres in disseminating 
information about the skills required successfully to exploit new technologies.

27
for emerging technologies. These consist of a small group of people who are 
knowledgeable both about science and education, and who will work with the 
Manufacturing Institute and employers to harvest information about the skills and 
knowledge needed to exploit new technology and translate it related statements 
of competence and job descriptions, and educational and training syllabi, so that 
training programmes keep pace with advances in technology (Bonvillian and Singer 
2017: 235-36; LIFT 2017: 3-4; Lewis and Bradshaw 2017: 8-9).18 They constitute 
a concrete example of how it is possible to develop the connections between 
organisations—in this instance, between employers and providers of vocational 
education and training—needed to facilitate the flows of information, in this case 
about the workforce required to operate emerging technologies, required for a 
smoothly working innovation system (cf. Ferrier et al. 2003: 27, 50, 61-62; Down 
2004: 114-16; Whittingham et al. 2004; Metcalfe 2005: 68-71, 2007: 451).19 

An example of an initiative developed along these lines comes from the therapy/
regenerative medicine sector. Firms in that industry are just beginning to move 
from a focus on R&D and process development to begin full-scale commercial 
manufacturing. As they do so, they will need to employ increasing numbers of 
specialist cell therapy manufacturing technicians. Employers are adamant that the 
people who occupy those roles will need to be genuine technicians, rather than 
over-qualified but under-skilled graduates (Lewis 2016b; Lewis and Bradshaw 2017). 
Initial support from the Gatsby Foundation, built on by funding from Innovate 
UK, made it possible for employers in cell therapy/regenerative medicine to work 
with each other, and with the Cell and Gene Therapy Catapult Centre, to create a 
suitable apprenticeship training scheme. The institutional ‘home’ of the team that will 
be managing the apprenticeship seems likely to be in the Cell and Gene Therapy 
Catapult Centres (whose facilities may also be used for some very specialist training, 
and whose knowledge of new developments in the relevant technology will be 
essential in ensuring that the relevant training programme will be kept up to date).20

However, some Catapult Centres may—indeed, arguably have been—discouraged 
from playing a role in technician skills and training because unlike their counterparts 
in some other countries, they do not have (a measure of) skills development as 
one of their key performance indicators. Consequently, their record when it comes 
to skills development, especially at the technician level, is mixed. Some, such as 
the Advanced Manufacturing Research Centre and the Manufacturing Technology 
Centre, have become involved in apprenticeship training on a significant scale to 
very good effect. However, others have paid little attention to technician skills and 
training, concentrating instead on training people qualified to graduate level or 
above.21 Given the importance of having a well-trained technician workforce to 
carry out manufacturing in general, and for the absorption of new technologies in 

18 Also see http://www.aplu.org/projects-and-initiatives/economic-development-and-community-engagement/Aligning-
Technology-and-Talent-Development/Index.html. 
19 Bonvillian and Singer (2018: 225) make a similar point with regard to the USA’s Manufacturing Institutes. Like Catapults, 
these  organisations  are  responsible  for  facilitating  the  development  of  emerging  technologies.  Unlike  Catapults,  they  have 
taken on board the principle that workforce development must go hand-in-hand with technology development. As Bonvillian 
and  Singer  put  it, “[E]ducation  and  training  programmes  should  not  be  a  sideline  but  rather  a  key  part  of  the  technology 
development and dissemination effort” (p. 225; also see pp. 232-36). Also see LIFT (2017).
20 See https://ct.catapult.org.uk/news-media/general-news/cgt-catapult-announces-major-uk-investment-skills-and-capabilities 
and https://ct.catapult.org.uk/news-media/general-news/addressing-sector-skills-gap-first-apprenticeship-programme-advanced. 
Accessed 12th March 2019.
21 This failure to put technician training on a par with R&D is arguably symptomatic of the continued influence of the old, 
linear view of innovation, which—as we have seen—emphasises the importance of high-level scientific research and neglects 
the importance of other influences on the development and diffusion of new technologies, including those associated with 
the work of technicians (Lundvall 2007: 104; Toner 2011: 8; CIPD 2014: 7, 24-26; Filippetti and Guy 2016: 506-07, 515; also see 
Jensen et al. 2007: 690). 

28
particular, the current approach—whereby some of the Catapult Centres become 
involved in training on an ad hoc basis—seems to be flawed. It is necessary to give 
the Catapult Centres a clearer remit to work with training providers to ensure 
the provision of high-quality apprenticeship training for emerging technologies, so 
as to put workforce development on a par with technology development in the 
Catapult Centre’s list of responsibilities. This could be done through the explicit 
inclusion of (indicators of) skills development as one of the key benchmarks against 
which their performance is assessed (Lewis 2014b, 2016a: 44-45, 2016b: 21; Gatsby 
Foundation 2017: 7; Perkins 2019: 53). In this way, an institutional framework could 
be established that would help to provide an adequate supply of skilled workers 
for employers in advanced manufacturing, so that workforce development and 
technology development can be properly aligned and coordination failures and 
structural mismatches avoided.22

Involving the Catapult Centres in technician skills and training also holds out the 
prospect of a solution to some of the other problems that bedevil technician skills 
and training in emerging industries, namely that firms in such industries are often 
small, unfamiliar with apprenticeships, and have highly truncated time horizons. 
First, many of the firms that are developing and deploying emerging technologies 
are SMEs who may be deterred from taking on apprentices by a lack of familiarity 
with apprenticeships and with the precise requirements of apprenticeship training 
programmes. This may be especially problematic because many such firms lack a large 
HR team that can master the process of taking on and training apprentices. Such 
firms may therefore simply decide that it is easier to hire over-qualified graduates to 
fill technician roles rather than fight their way through what is in the UK at least a 
rather labyrinthine apprenticeship system. Second, those firms are also often said to 
have short-time horizons, being preoccupied with the immediate demands of running 
and developing their business and not looking far enough ahead to contemplate the 
need to fill technician roles in two to three years time (Sims et al. 2000: 1; Lewis 
2014c: 505; NASEM 2017: 77). The problem, of course, is that if firms do not look 
that far ahead, then given the long lead time involved in technician training, the 
workers in question will not be available when they are needed. 

The Catapult Centres may have a significant role to play in dealing with these 
problems. If a dedicated apprenticeship team, consisting of no more than one or 
two people, were employed within each Catapult, then they could play a convening 
or coordinating role that would see them assist SMEs in recruiting apprentices, 
in finding a suitable training provider, and in navigating the requirements of 
apprenticeship training programmes (as well as exploiting opportunities for 
funding). In this way, it might be possible to relieve SMEs of much of the burden 
of managing the apprenticeships, thereby removing one of the barriers to their 

22 This imperative has already received some recognition in Scotland, where the recent Reid review of Innovation Centres 
(ICs)—the Scottish counterpart to the English Catapult Centres—stated the following: “The ICs were created to help bring 
academic expertise to business-led challenges that would have an economic impact for Scotland. The success of the college 
sector  in  Scotland  can  be  through  innovation  of  business  products,  but  is  more  often  about  delivering  skills,  and  through 
those enhanced skills, improved productivity and efficiency. The delivery of skills is not some sort of “secondary” innovation – 
developing new skills and techniques to apply alongside new technological innovation is vital if such developments are to be 
embedded and made truly a commercial success. Having the college sector work more closely than is currently happening 
with both the ICs and the university sector should strengthen the performance of the ICs” (Reid 2016: 38; also see Scottish 
Funding Council 2017).

29
participation in such programmes.23 A more radical possibility, which might address 
the second of the two problems noted in the previous paragraph, would involve 
the Catapult Centre in actually employing the apprentices, who would then be 
hired out to SME ‘host employers’ for the duration of their training. The host would 
pay a fee for this service, the size of which would depend both on the apprentice’s 
wage and also any management fee charged by the Catapult Centre.

Precisely which delivery model is best is likely to vary between sectors, so one 
would not expect all Catapult Centres to play their role in aligning workforce 
and technology development in the same way. But that they should have such a 
role seems clear.

23  This is not, of course, the only way in which these problems might be solved. Another possibility, which firms in advanced 
manufacturing have adopted, centres on what is called ‘over-training’. This involves a large employer, who currently offers high-
quality  apprenticeships,  playing  a  role  in  the  training  of  more  apprentices  than  they  themselves  require  to  meet  their  own 
anticipated needs, with the extra apprentices being employed from the outset of their apprenticeship by other firms (often small 
and medium-sized enterprises). The larger firm will typically manage the training and assessment of the apprentices, using its own 
apprentice managers, instructors and assessors to do so. It may also provide some of the on-the-job training itself, especially if it has 
its own training facilities. The smaller firms that have their apprentices managed in this way can gain access to a more experienced, 
and effective, way of managing and training their apprentices than they themselves could provide on their own. Moreover, the 
large employers that offer such over-training do not do so as a charitable act, but rather because they expect to benefit from 
doing so, for one of two reasons: either because the government funding and fees they gain from over-training help them to cover 
some of the fixed costs of running their own apprenticeship schemes; or because, by training apprentices for firms in their supply 
chain, they stand to gain from having better quality, and /or more reliable, input supplies. Several large employers in UK advanced 
manufacturing already engage in over-training and there exist some firms in sectors using emerging technologies, such as those 
involved in the ATMP and biologics industries, that are well situated to join their ranks (Lewis 2014c).

30
6. CONCLUSION

Technicians make significant contributions to innovation. They often participate in 
the experimental work involved in research and development. They draw on their 
detailed, practical experience of production to make suggestions about incremental 
improvements in production processes. And, perhaps most important of all, they 
have a critical role to play in enabling firms successfully to deploy new technology, 
thereby contributing to the absorptive capacity of the firms that employ them.

In the UK, however, the critical role played by technicians all too often goes 
unrecognised, obscured by a commitment on the part of policy-makers to a linear 
view of innovation that over-emphasises fundamental research and development 
and so neglects other important influences on innovation, in particular those 
stemming from technicians. The shortcomings of the institutions governing 
vocational education and training mean that workforce development is often 
poorly aligned with technology development, leading to system failures in the 
sense in which that term is used in the innovation systems literature. In particular, 
firms seeking to introduce new technology all too often struggle to find the skilled 
technicians they need to do so. 

What is required to deal with this problem is a system of institutions that will 
encourage and enable the production of workers with the skills required effectively 
to deploy new technologies (perhaps especially those characteristic of emerging, 
high-value added industries where productivity and wages are likely to be high). If 
the benefits of those technologies are to be fully exploited, then their development 
must go hand-in-hand with the training of the workers—prominent amongst 
them the technicians—who will put them into practice in the workplace. Catapult 
Centres, and other innovation centres, are very well placed to respond to the 
demands that technological innovation places on firms’ workforces, and to play 
a key role in enabling employers to obtain the key technician skills they require. 
Those organisations need to be given an explicit remit to play the critical role they 
can serve in workforce development so that, to borrow the terminology of the 
chief economist of the Bank of England, they can become ‘diffusion spokes’ as well 
as ‘innovation hubs’ by helping firms to develop the technician workforce required 
to make good use of new technologies as well as to develop them in the first place 
(Haldane 2018: 16). 

31
REFERENCES
Adonis, A. (2014). Competing in a Race to the Top. Results from the Employer Survey 
for the Adonis Growth Review. London: Policy Network.

Andreoni, A. (2014). ‘Structural Learning: Embedding Discoveries and the Dynamics 
of Production.’ Structural Change and Economic Dynamics, 29: 58-74.

Arrow, K. (1962). ‘Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention.’ 
In R. Nelson (ed.), The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press.

BIS (2011). Innovation and Research Strategy for Growth. BIS Economics Paper No. 15. 
London: Department for Business, Innovation and Skills. Available online at: http://
group-global.org/sites/default/files/publications/Innovation%20and%20Research%20
Strategy%20for%20Growth_3.pdf. Accessed 6th October 2017.

BIS (2015). Evaluation of the Employer Ownership of Skills Pilot, Round 1: Initial 
Findings. London: Department of Business, Innovation and Skills.

Bonvillian, W. and P. Singer (2017). Advanced Manufacturing: The New American 
Innovation Policies. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Borrás, S. and C. Edquist (2015). ‘Education, Training and Skills in Innovation Policy.’ 
Social Science and Public Policy, 42: 215-27.

Burnett, K. (2016). ‘University-Led Apprenticeships: A New Model for Apprentice 
Education.’ In T. Lanning (ed,), Where Next for Apprenticeships? London: CIPD.

Bush, V. (1945). Science: The Endless Frontier. A Report to the President. Washington, 
DC: US Government Printing Office.

Campbell, M. (2012). Skills for Prosperity? A Review of OECD and Partner Country Skills 
Strategies. LLAKES Research Paper 39. London: LLAKES.

Chevalier, A. and J. Lindley (2009). ‘Over-education and the Skills of UK Graduates.’ 
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society 172 (2), 307-37.

CIPD (2014). Industrial Strategy and the Future of Skills Policy. London: Chartered 
Institute of Personnel and Development. Available online at: https://www.cipd.co.uk/
knowledge/work/skills/industrial-strategy-report. Accessed 12th September 2018.

Cohen, W. and D. Levinthal (1990). ‘Absorptive Capacity: A New Perspective on 
Learning and Innovation.’ Administrative Science Quarterly, 35: 128-52.

Dahlman, C. and Nelson, R. (1995). ‘Social Absorption Capability, National 
Innovation Systems and Economic Development.’ In B. Koo D. and Perkins (eds.), 
Social Capability and Long Term Economic Growth. Basingstoke: Macmillan.

David, P. and G. Wright (1997). ‘Increasing Returns and the Genesis of American 
Resource Abundance.’ Industrial and Corporate Change, 6: 203-45.

DBEIS (2018). Business Productivity Review. London: Department of Business, Energy 
and Industrial Strategy.

32
DBIS (2014). The Case for Public Support of Innovation: At the Sector, Technology 
and Challenge Area Levels. London: Department of Business, Innovation and Skills. 
Available online at: https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/
attachment_data/file/334369/BIS_14_852_The_Case_for_Public_Support_of_
Innovation.pdf. Accessed 28th September 2017. 

D’Ippolito, B., M. Miozzo and D. Consoli (2014). ‘Knowledge Systematisation, 
Reconfiguration and the Organisation of Firms and Industry: The Case of Design.’ 
Research Policy, 43: 1334-52.

Dosi, G., C. Freeman, R. Nelson, G. Silverberg and L. Soete (eds.) (1988). Technical 
Change and Economic Theory. London: Pinter Publishers.

Dosi, G. and R. Nelson (2018). ‘Technological Advance as an Evolutionary Process.’ 
In R. Nelson, G. Dosi, C. Helfat, A. Pyka, P. Saviotti, K. Lee, K. Dopfer, F. Malerba and S. 
Winter (2018). Modern Evolutionary Economics: An Overview. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.

Down, C. (2004). ‘Tackling Emergent Needs: The Applied Technology Framework 
Project.’ In S. Dawe (ed.), Vocational Education and Training and Innovation. Adelaide: 
NCVER.

Edler, J. and J. Fagerberg (2017). ‘Innovation Policy: What, Why, and How.’ Oxford 
Review of Economic Policy, 33: 2-23.

Edquist, C. (1997a). ‘Preface’ In C. Edquist (ed.), Systems of Innovation: Technologies, 
Institutions. London and Washington: Pinter.

Edquist, C. (1997b). ‘Systems of Innovation Approaches – Their Emergence and 
Characteristics.’ In C. Edquist (ed.), Systems of Innovation: Technologies, Institutions. 
London and Washington: Pinter.

Edquist, C. (2005). ‘Systems of Innovation: Perspectives and Challenges.’ In J. 
Fagerberg, D. Mowrey and R. Nelson (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Innovation. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Eriksson, L. and A. Webster (2015). ‘Standardizing Work as a Recursive Process: 
Shaping the Embryonic Stem Cell Field.’ New Genetics and Society, 34: 72-88.

Fagerberg, J. (2017). ‘Innovation Policy: Rationales, Lessons and Challenges.’ Journal of 
Economic Surveys, 31: 497-512.

Ferrier, F., C. Trood and K. Whittingham (2003). Going Boldly into the Future: A VET 
Journey into the National Innovation System. Leabrook: NCVER.

Field, S. (2018). The Missing Middle: Higher Technical Education in England. London: 
The Gatsby Charitable Foundation. Available online at: http://www.gatsby.org.uk/
uploads/education/the-missing-middle-higher-technical-education-in-england.pdf. 
Accessed 14th January 2019.

Filippetti, A. and F. Guy (2016). ‘Skills and Social Insurance: Evidence from the 
Relative Persistence of Innovation during the Financial Crisis in Europe.’ Science and 
Public Policy, 43: 505-17.

Finegold, D. and D. Soskice (1988). ‘The Failure of Training in Britain: Analysis and 
Prescription.’ Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 4: 21-51.

33
Freeman, C. (1987). Technology Policy and Economic Performance: Lessons from Japan. 
London: Frances Pinter.

Gatsby Charitable Foundation (2017). Building our Industrial Strategy? Response 
to the Government Green Paper. London: The Gatsby Foundation. Available online 
at: http://www.gatsby.org.uk/uploads/education/reports/pdf/gatsby-response-to-
industrial-strategy-201704.pdf. 

Government Economic Service (2014). GES Group on Growth: Innovation. 
London: Government Economic Service. Available online at: https://www.gov.uk/
government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/370187/bis-14-1169-
government-economic-service-group-on-growth-innovation.pdf. Accessed 2nd 
March 2018.

Green, F and Y. Zhu (2010) ‘Over-qualification, Job Dissatisfaction, and Increasing 
Dispersion in the Returns to Graduate Education.’ Oxford Economic Papers, 62: 740-
763.

Haldane, A. (2018). ‘The UK’s Innovation Problem: Hub no Spokes.’ London: Bank 
of England. Available online at https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/
files/speech/2018/the-uks-productivity-problem-hub-no-spokes-speech-by-andy-
haldane.pdf?la=en&hash=EBFB24E61501EC24D0F0D2545A49821623491D4B. 
Accessed 4th February 2019.

Hauser, H. (2014). Review of the Catapult Network: Recommendations on the Future 
Shape, Scope and Ambition of the Programme. London: Department of Business, 
Innovation and Skills. Available online at: https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/
system/uploads/attachment_data/file/368416/bis-14-1085-review-of-the-catapult-
network.pdf. Accessed 14th January 2019.

Herrmann, A. and A. Peine (2011). ‘When “National Innovation System” Meet 
“Varieties of Capitalism” Arguments on Labour Qualifications: On the Skill types 
and Scientific Knowledge Needed for Radical and Incremental Product Innovations.’ 
Research Policy, 40: 687-701.

Holmes, C. and K. Mayhew (2015). Over-qualification and Skills Mismatch in the 
Graduate Labour Market. London: CIPD.

House of Lords Economic Affairs Select Committee (2018). Treating Students Fairly: 
The Economics of Post-School Education. London: House of Lords. Available online 
at: https://publications.parliament.uk/pa/ld201719/ldselect/ldeconaf/139/139.pdf. 
Accessed 30th September 2018. 

HM Government (2017). Building our Industrial Strategy: Green Paper. London: 
London: Department of Business, Innovation and Skills. Available online at https://
beisgovuk.citizenspace.com/strategy/industrial-strategy/supporting_documents/
buildingourindustrialstrategygreenpaper.pdf.

HM Treasury and Department of Business, Innovation and Skills (2011). The Plan for 
Growth. London: HM Treasury and BIS.

HØyrup, S. (2010). ‘Employee-Driven Innovation and Workplace Learning: Basic 
Concepts, Approaches and Themes.’ Transfer, 16: 143-54.

34
Jagger, N., M. Sigla and F. Sumption (2010). SET Based Technicians: Lessons from 
the UK and European Labour Force Surveys. Report 475. Brighton: Institute for 
Employment Studies.

Jensen, M., B. Johnson, E. Lorenz and B.-Å. Lundvall (2007). ‘Forms of Knowledge and 
Modes of Innovation.’ Research Policy, 36: 680-93.

Jones, B. and D. Grimshaw (2012). Training and Skills to Improve Innovation in Firms: 
Compendium of Evidence on the Effectiveness of Innovation Policy Intervention. 
Manchester: Manchester Institute of Innovation Research. Available online at: http://
www.innovation-policy.org.uk/share/NESTA_Compendium_Training_20122805_
linked.pdf. Accessed 30th January 2018.

Jones, B. and D. Grimshaw (2016). ‘The Impact of Skill Formation Policies on 
Innovation.’ In J. Edler, P. Cunningham, A. Gök and P. Shapira (eds.), Handbook of 
Innovation Policy Impact. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.

Keep, E. (2013). Opening the ‘Black Box’ – The Increasing Importance of a Public Policy 
Focus on What Happens in the Workplace. Edinburgh: Skills Development Scotland.

Keep, E. and Mayhew, K. (2014). Industrial Strategy and the Future of Skills Policy: The 
High Road to Sustainable Growth. London: CIPD.

Kline, S. and N. Rosenberg, 'An Overview of Innovation'. In R. Landau and N. 
Rosenberg (eds.), The Positive Sum Strategy: Harnessing Technology for Economic 
Growth (Washington, DC.: National Academy of Sciences).

Lanning, T. (2016). ‘Introduction.’ In T. (ed,), Where Next for Apprenticeships? London: 
CIPD.

Laursen, K. and N. Foss (2003). ‘New Human Resource Management Practices, 
Complementarities and the Impact on Innovation Performance.’ Cambridge Journal 
of Economics, 27: 243-63.

Lewis, P.A. (2012a). Flying High: A Study of Technician Skills and Training in the UK 
Aerospace Industry. London: The Gatsby Charitable Foundation. Available online at: 
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2893710. 

Lewis, P. (2012b). Space for Technicians? An Analysis of Technician Skills and Training in 
the UK Space Sector. London: King’s College London and The Gatsby Foundation. 
Available online at: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2861985. 

Lewis, P.A. (2013a). Technician Roles, Skills and Training in the UK Chemical Industry: 
An Analysis. London: The Gatsby Charitable Foundation. Available online at: https://
papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2895115. Accessed 20th June 2018.

Lewis, P. (2013b). Skills and Training for Composites Manufacturing and Use in the UK: 
An Analysis. London: The Gatsby Charitable Foundation. Available online at: https://
papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2883236. 

Lewis, P.A. (2014a). The Simple Economics of Apprenticeship. London: The Gatsby 
Charitable Foundation. Available online at: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
cfm?abstract_id=2853015. Accessed 20th August 2018.

35
Lewis, P.A. (2014b). Catapult Centres: An Analysis of their Role in Technician Skills 
and Training. Unpublished paper, Department of Political Economy, King’s College 
London.

Lewis, P.A. (2014c). “The Over-training of Apprentices by Employers in Advanced 
Manufacturing: A Theoretical and Policy Analysis.” Human Resource Management 
Journal (2014), 24 (4): 496-513. Available online at: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/
papers.cfm?abstract_id=2530874. 

Lewis, P.A. (2016a). Technician Roles, Skills and Training in Industrial Biotechnology: An 
Analysis. London: The Gatsby Charitable Foundation. Available online at: https://
papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2894834. Accessed 20th June 2018.

Lewis, P.A. (2016b). How to Create Skills for an Emerging Industry: The Case of 
Technician Skills and Training in Cell Therapy. London: The Gatsby Charitable 
Foundation. Available online at: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_
id=2903909. 

Lewis, P.A. (2017). ‘The Ostroms and Hayek as Theorists of Complex Adaptive 
Systems: Commonality and Complementarity.’ Advances in Austrian Economics, 
22: 35-66. Available online at: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_
id=2940972. Accessed 18th June 2018.

Lewis, P.A. and H. Gospel (2011). Technicians under the Microscope: The Training and 
Skills of University Laboratory and Engineering Workshop Technicians. Available online 
at: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2894151.

Lewis, P.A. and H. Gospel (2015). ‘Technicians under the Microscope: The Training 
and Skills of University Laboratory and Engineering Workshop Technicians.’ Journal 
of Vocational Education and Training, 67: 421-41.

Lewis, P. A. and T. Bradshaw (2017). Developing Technician Skills for Emerging Industries: 
Lessons from the Advanced Therapies Sector in the UK. London: King’s College London. 
Available online at: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3009630.

LIFT (2017). Aligning Technology and Talent Development. Detroit: LIFT. Available 
online at: http://www.aplu.org/library/aligning-technology-and-talent-development/
file. Accessed 10th January 2019.

B-A Lundvall (2007). ‘National Innovation Systems: Analytical Concept and 
Development Tool.’ Industry and Innovation, 14: 95-119.

Lundvall, B.-Å. (ed.) (1992), National Innovation Systems: Towards a Theory of 
Innovation and Interactive Learning. London: Pinter Publishers.

Lundvall, B.-Å. and B. Johnson (1994). ‘The Learning Economy.’ Journal of Industry 
Studies, 1: 23-42.

Maier, J. (2017). Made Smarter Review 2017. Available online at: https://assets.
publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
file/655570/20171027_MadeSmarter_FINAL_DIGITAL.pdf. Accessed 30th January 
2019.

March, J. (1991). ‘Exploration and Exploitation in Organizational Learning.’ 
Organization Science, 2: 71-87.

36
Mason, G. (2012). Science, Engineering, and Technology (SET) Technicians in the UK 
Economy. London: The Gatsby Charitable Foundation.

Mason, G., A. Rincon-Aznar and F. Venturini (2017). ‘Which Skills Contribute Most 
to Absorptive Capacity, Innovation, And Productivity Performance? Evidence from 
the US and Western Europe.’ LLAKES Research Paper 60. Available online at: http://
www.llakes.ac.uk/sites/default/files/60.%20Mason%20et%20al%20-%20final_0.pdf. 
Accessed 18th November 2017. 

McKinsey Global Institute (2012). Manufacturing the Future: The Next Era of Global 
Growth and Innovation. McKinsey Global Institute. Available online at: https://
www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/operations/our-insights/the-future-of-
manufacturing. Accessed 2nd October 2017. 

Metcalfe, S. (1995). ‘Technology Systems and Technology Policy in an Evolutionary 
Framework.’ Cambridge Journal of Economics, 19: 25-46.

Metcalfe, S. (2005). ‘Systems Failure and the Case for Innovation Policy.’ In P. Llerna 
and M. Matt (eds.), Innovation Policy in a Knowledge-Based Economy: Theory and 
Practice. Berlin: Springer.

Metcalfe, S. (2007). ‘Innovation Systems, Innovation Policy and Restless Capitalism.’ 
In F. Malerba and S. Brusoni (eds.), Perspectives on Innovation. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.

Michie, J. and M. Sheehan (1999). ‘HRM Practices, R&D Expenditure and Innovative 
Investment: Evidence from the UK’s 1990 Workplace Industrial Relations Survey.’ 
Industrial and Corporate Change, 8: 2111-34.

Misko, J., J. Saunders and D. Woods (2004). ‘Training needs of Innovative Companies.’ 
In S. Dawe (ed.) (2004), Vocational Education and Training and Innovation: Research 
Readings. Adelaide: NCVER. Available online at: https://www.ncver.edu.au/__data/
assets/file/0022/5269/nd3113.pdf. Accessed 11th October 2017.

Mytelka, L. and K. Smith (2002). ‘Policy Learning and Innovation Theory: An 
Interactive and Co-evolving Process.’ Research Policy, 31: 1467-79.

NASEM (2017). Building America’s Skilled Technical Workforce. Washington, DC: The 
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine. 

National Audit Office (2016). Delivering Value Through the Apprenticeships 
Programme. London: The National Audit Office.

Nelson, R. (1959). ‘The Simple Economics of Basic Scientific Research.’ Journal of 
Political Economy, 67: 49-91.

Nelson, R. (1980). ‘Production Sets, Technological Knowledge, and R&D: Fragile and 
Overworked Constructs for Analysis of Productivity Growth?’ American Economic 
Review, Papers and Proceedings, 70: 62-67.

Nelson, R. (1992). ‘National Innovation Systems: A Retrospective on a Study.’ 
Industrial and Corporate Change, 1: 347-74.

Nelson, R. (ed.) (1993). National Systems of Innovation: A Comparative Study. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.

37
Nelson, R. (1994). ‘The Co-evolution of Technology, Industrial Structure, and 
Supporting Institutions.’ Industrial and Corporate Change, 3: 47-63.

Nelson, R. and E. Phelps (1966). ‘Investment in Humans, Technological Diffusion and 
Economic Growth.’ American Economic Review, 56: 69-75.

Nelson, R. and N. Rosenberg (1993). ‘Technical Innovation and National Systems.’ In 
R. Nelson, (ed.) (1993), National Systems of Innovation: A Comparative Study. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.

Nonaka, I. and H. Takeuchi (1995). The Knowledge Creating Company. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.

OECD (1997a). Oslo Manual: Proposed Guidelines for Collecting and Interpreting 
Technological Innovation Data. 2nd edition. Paris: Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development. Available online at: http://www.oecd.org/sti/
inno/2367580.pdf. Accessed 10th June 2018.

OECD (1997b). National Innovation Systems. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development. Available online at: http://www.oecd.org/science/
inno/2101733.pdf. Accessed 10th June 2018.

OECD (1999). Managing National Innovation Systems. Paris: Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development. Available online at: http://echo.iat.sfu.ca/
library/oecd99_managing_National_IS.pdf. Accessed 10th June 2018.

OECD (2002). Dynamising National Innovation Systems. Paris: Organisation 
for Economic Co-operation and Development. Available online at: https://
read.oecd-ilibrary.org/industry-and-services/dynamising-national-innovation-
systems_9789264194465-en#page1 Accessed 10th June 2018.

OECD (2005): Oslo Manual: Proposed Guidelines for Collecting and Interpreting 
Technological Innovation Data. 3rd edition. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development. 

OECD (2013). OECD Skills Outlook 2013. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development. 

OECD (2017). Getting Skills Right: United Kingdom. Paris: Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development. 

Perkins, J. (2019). Engineering Skills for the Future: The 2013 Perkins Review Revisited. 
London: Royal Academy of Engineering.

Prais, S. (1995). Productivity, Education and Training: An International Perspective. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (2014). Accelerating U.S. 
Advanced Manufacturing: Report to the President. Washington, D.C.: Executive Office 
of the President and the President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology. 
Available online at: https://www.manufacturingusa.com/sites/prod/files/amp20_
report_final.pdf. Accessed 11th October 2017.

Ramstad, E. (2009). ‘Expanding Innovation System and Policy – An Organisational 
Perspective.’ Policy Studies, 30: 533-53.

38
Reid, G. (2016). Independent Review of the Innovation Centres Programme. 
Edinburgh: Scottish Funding Council. Available online at: http://www.sfc.ac.uk/
web/FILES/InnovationCentres/Independent_Review_of_Innovation_Centres_
Programme_-_29_September_2016.pdf. Accessed 12th February 2019.

Rosenberg, N. (1982). Inside the Black Box: Technology and Economics: Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.

Rosenberg, N. (1994). Exploring the Black Box: Technology and Economics: Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.

Rosenberg, N. and R. Nelson (1994). ‘American Universities and Technical Advance 
in Industry.’ Research Policy, 23: 323-48.

Ryan, P. H. Gospel and P. Lewis (2007). ‘Large Employers and Apprenticeship Training 
in the UK.’ British Journal of Industrial Relations, 45: 127-53.

Sainsbury, D. (2018). Post-18 Education and Funding Review. London: The Gatsby 
Charitable Foundation. Available online at: http://www.gatsby.org.uk/uploads/
education/reports/pdf/gill-response-to-post-18-review-201804.pdf. Accessed 28th 
January 2019.

Scottish Funding Council (2017). College Innovation. Edinburgh: Scottish Funding 
Council. Available online at:  http://www.sfc.ac.uk/web/FILES/councilpapers_25082017/
SFC17-62-college-innovation.pdf. Accessed 12th February 2019.

Shapira, P., R. Smits and S. Kuhlmann (2010). ‘An Outlook on Innovation Policy.’ In R. 
Smits, S. Kuhlmann and P. Shapira (eds.), The Theory and Practice of Innovation Policy: 
An International Research Handbook. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.

Sharif, N. (2006). ‘Emergence and Development of the National Innovation Systems 
Concept.’ Research Policy, 35: 745-66.

Sims, D., S. Golden, S. Blenkinsop and G. Lewis (2000). Barriers to the Take-Up of 
Modern Apprenticeships and National Traineeships by SMEs and Specific Sectors. 
DFES Research Report 205. London DFEE. Available online at: http://webarchive.
nationalarchives.gov.uk/20130402134059/https://www.education.gov.uk/
publications/eOrderingDownload/RB205.pdf. Accessed 10th October 2018.

Skills Commission (2011). Technicians and Progression. London: Policy Connect.

Smith, A., J, Courvisanos, J. Tuck and S. McEachern (2012). Building the Capacity to 
Innovate: The Role of Human Capital. Adelaide: NCVER. Available online at: https://
files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED529887.pdf. Accessed 10th January 2018.

Smith, K. (2000). ‘Innovation as a Systemic Phenomenon: Rethinking the Role of 
Policy.’ Enterprise and Innovation Management Studies, 1: 73-102. 

Smith, K. (2010). ‘Globalisation and Innovation Systems: Policy Issues.’ In R. Smits, 
S. Kuhlmann and P. Shapira (eds.), The Theory and Practice of Innovation Policy: An 
International Research Handbook. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.

Stevens, M. (1999). ‘Human Capital Theory and UK Vocational Training Policy.’ Oxford 
Review of Economic Policy, 15: 16-32.

39
Sung, J. and D. Ashton (2015). Skills in Business: The Role of Business Strategy, Skills 
Development and Skills Policy. London: Sage.

Tether, B., A. Mina, D. Consoli and D. Gagliardi (2005). A Literature Review on Skills 
and Innovation. How does Successful Innovation Impact on the Demand for Skills 
and How do Skills Drive Innovation? Manchester: ESRC Centre for Research on 
Innovation and Competition. Available online at: https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/
f25b/956d1002734286479e103a6ef01795062cdb.pdf. Accessed 9th October 2017.

TSB (2011). Technology and Innovation Centres: Closing the Gap between Concept 
and Commercialisation. Strategy and Implementation Plan. Swindon: Technology 
Strategy Board.

Toner, P. (2010). ‘Innovation and Vocational Education.’ The Economic and Labour 
Relations Review, 21: 75-98.

Toner, P. (2011). Workforce Skills and Innovation: An Overview of Major Themes in 
the Literature. Paris: OECD. Available online at: http://www.oecd.org/innovation/
inno/46970941.pdf. Accessed 13th October 2013.

Toner, P., J. Marceau, R. Hall and G. Considine (2004). ‘Innovation Agents: Vocational 
Education and Training Skills in the Present and Future Australian Innovation System. 
In S. Dawe (ed.) (2004), Vocational Education and Training and Innovation: Research 
Readings. Adelaide: NCVER. Available online at: https://www.ncver.edu.au/__data/
assets/file/0022/5269/nd3113.pdf. Accessed 11th October 2017.

Toner,. P., T. Turpin, R. Woolley and C. Lloyd (2010). The Role and Contribution of 
Tradespeople and Technicians in Australian Research & Development: An Exploratory 
Study. Canberra: Australian Capital Territory: Department of Education, Employment 
and Workplace Relations. Available online at: https://www.voced.edu.au/content/
ngv%3A46414. Accessed 4th January 2018.

UKCES (2010a). Skills for Job: The National Skills Audit for England 2010. Volume 1: Key 
Findings. Wath-upon-Dearne: UKCES.

UKCES (2010b). Skills for Jobs: Today and Tomorrow. Volume 2: the Evidence Report. 
Wath-upon-Dearne: UKCES. 

UKCES (2015). Growth Through People: Evidence and Analysis. Wath-upon-Dearne: 
UKCES.

von Hippel, E. (1988). The Sources of Innovation New York: Oxford University Press.

von Hippel, E. (2015). ‘Democratising Innovation: The Evolving Phenomenon of User 
Innovation.’ Journal für Betriebswirtschaft, 55: 63-78. 

Vona, F. and D. Consoli (2014). ‘Innovation and Skill Dynamics: A Life-Cycle 
Approach.’ Industrial and Corporate Change, 24: 1393-1415. 

Westwood, A. (2016). ‘Why Colleges and Universities Should be Offering More and 
Better Apprenticeships.’ In T. Lanning (ed,), Where Next for Apprenticeships? London: 
CIPD.

Whittingham, K., F. Ferrier and C. Trood. ‘Vocational Education and Training and the 
Commercialisation of Australian Research.’ In S. Dawe (ed.), Vocational Education 
and Training and Innovation. Adelaide: NCVER.

40
Wolf, A. (2011). Review of Vocational Education – The Wolf Report. London: 
Department for Education.

Wolf, A. (2015). Heading for the Precipice: Can Further and Higher Education Funding 
Policies be Sustained? London: The Policy Institute at King’s College London. 

Woolthius, R., M. Lankhuizen and V. Gilsing (2005). ‘A System Failure Framework for 
Innovation Policy Design.’ Technovation, 25: 609-19.

York Consulting (2018). Level 4 and 5 Provision in England: Provider Perspectives. 
London: The Gatsby Charitable Foundation. Available online at: http://www.gatsby.
org.uk/uploads/education/york-consulting-level-4-and-5-provision-in-england-
provider-perspectives-2018.pdf. Accessed 2nd February 2019.

Zahra, S. and G. George (2002). ‘Absorptive Capacity: A Review, 
Reconceptualization, and Extension.’ Academy of Management Review, 27: 185-203.

41
42
The Gatsby Charitable Foundation

The Peak, 5 Wilton Road, London SW1V 1AP

T +44 (0)20 7410 0330  www.gatsby.org.uk

Registered Charity number 251988

Copyright © Gatsby Charitable Foundation

June 2019
