[Page #0]
House of Commons
Environmental Audit Committee
Green Jobs
Third Report of Session 2021–22
HC 75
[Page #1]
House of Commons
Environmental Audit Committee
Green Jobs
Third Report of Session 2021–22
Report, together with formal minutes relating to the report
Ordered by the House of Commons to be printed 21 October 2021
HC 75Published on 25 October 2021by authority of the House of Commons
[Page #2]
Environmental Audit Committee
The Environmental Audit Committee is appointed by the House of Commons to consider to what extent the policies and programmes of government departments and non-departmental public bodies contribute to environmental protection and sustainable development; to audit their performance against such targets as may be set for them by Her Majesty’s Ministers; and to report thereon to the House.
Current membership
Rt Hon Philip Dunne MP (Conservative, Ludlow) (Chair)
Duncan Baker MP (Conservative, North Norfolk)
Dan Carden MP (Labour, Liverpool, Walton)
Sir Christopher Chope MP (Conservative, Christchurch)
Barry Gardiner MP (Labour, Brent North)
Rt Hon Robert Goodwill MP (Conservative, Scarborough and Whitby)
James Gray MP (Conservative, North Wiltshire)
Helen Hayes MP (Labour, Dulwich and West Norwood)
Ian Levy MP (Conservative, Blyth Valley)
Caroline Lucas MP (Green Party, Brighton, Pavilion)
Cherilyn Mackrory MP (Conservative, Truro and Falmouth)
Jerome Mayhew MP (Conservative, Broadland)
John McNally MP (Scottish National Party, Falkirk)
Dr Matthew Offord MP (Conservative, Hendon)
Claudia Webbe MP (Independent, Leicester East)
Nadia Whittome MP (Labour, Nottingham East)
The following Members were also members of the Committee during this Parliament:
Feryal Clark MP (Labour, Enfield North), Marco Longhi MP (Conservative, Dudley North), Kerry McCarthy MP (Labour, Bristol East), Alex Sobel MP (Leeds, North West), and Mr Shailesh Vara MP (Conservative, North West Cambridgeshire).
Powers
The constitution and powers are set out in House of Commons Standing Orders, principally in SO No 152A. These are available on the internet via www.parliament.uk.
Publications
© Parliamentary Copyright House of Commons 2021. This publication may be reproduced under the terms of the Open Parliament Licence, which is published at www.parliament.uk/site-information/copyright-parliament.
Committee reports are published on the Committee’s website at www.parliament.uk/eacom and in print by Order of the House.
[Page #3]
Committee staff during this inquiry
Martyn Atkins (Clerk), Andrew Bax (Committee Specialist), Medha Bhasin (Second Clerk), Amy Brew (Committee Specialist), James Camp (Committee Operations Officer), Nick Davies (Senior Committee Specialist), Marc Geddes (Parliamentary Fellow), Laura Grant (Committee Specialist), Kirsty MacLeod (Committee Researcher), Ben Smith (Committee Support Apprentice), and Jonathan Wright (Committee Operations Manager).
Contacts
All correspondence should be addressed to the Clerk of the Environmental Audit Committee, House of Commons, London SW1A 0AA. The telephone number for general enquiries is 020 7219 8890; the Committee’s email address is eacom@parliament.uk.
You can follow the Committee on Twitter using @CommonsEAC.
[Page #4]
None
[Page #5]
  Green Jobs 
1
Contents
Summary 
3
1  Green jobs ambitions 
5
Introduction 
5
Measuring green jobs 
7
Co-ordinating funding 
14
2 
Jobs and skills for a green covid-19 recovery 
18
Labour market interventions 
18
National Nature Service 
20
Green Homes Grant voucher scheme 
24
3 
Long-term environmental goals and a just transition to net zero 
29
Long-term environmental goals 
29
Skills to deliver the 25 Year Environment Plan 
29
Just transition to net zero 
31
Regional planning and support 
31
Off-shoring risks 
35
4  Education and skills pipeline 
38
National Curriculum, A Levels and access to nature 
38
Apprenticeships and T Levels 
42
Equivalent or lower funding restrictions 
44
Ongoing skills monitoring 
46
5  Diversity, inclusion and access to green jobs 
52
Diversity and inclusion 
52
Enabling infrastructure 
54
Careers strategy 
55
Annex: Roundtable event 
59
Conclusions and recommendations 
62
Formal minutes 
68
Witnesses 
69
Published written evidence 
71
List of Reports from the Committee during the current Parliament 
74
[Page #6]
2
  Green Jobs 
Summary
Achieving the Government’s net zero and long-term environmental goals depends on a skilled green workforce in the economy to deliver these. The Government is aiming for 2 million green jobs by 2030; the level of Government ambition and the work carried out by the Green Jobs Taskforce provides a good foundation for delivering this green workforce.  What  is  needed  now  is  a  detailed  plan  for  how  these  ambitions  will  be delivered.
For the Government to be able to monitor and evaluate the impact of its policies against its green jobs ambitions, the delivery plan must include the Government’s definition and metric for ‘green jobs’. The delivery plan and the Government’s definition should reflect  the  fact  that  ‘green  jobs’  include  those  jobs  which  are  needed  to  deliver  the Government’s wider long-term environmental objectives, including jobs in enhancing biodiversity and the circular economy, as well as net zero.
Meeting  these  ambitions  will  require  action  from  across  the  Government.  The Government’s  delivery  plan  must  set  out  the  division  of  action  and  responsibilities between departments and its co-ordination and oversight arrangements, including its arrangements for collaboration with the devolved administrations and local government. For departments to be able to budget for and prioritise action on green jobs, the delivery plan should include estimated costings of the actions needed by each department. The Government also needs to assess the funding required by local government for the green jobs and skills needed within local authorities to deliver climate and nature actions at a local level.
It  is  welcome  that  the  Department  for  Environment,  Food  and  Rural  Affairs  is collaborating with the Department for Education to produce a skills gap plan, to identify skills gaps which could affect the delivery of the Government’s 25 Year Environment Plan objectives. This skills gap plan must be accompanied by an action plan, to address any shortages identified.
Action  to  stimulate  green  jobs  in  the  pandemic  recovery  would  accelerate  the establishment and growth of green sectors and build skills and workforce towards long term  net  zero  and  environmental  targets,  at  the  same  time  as  addressing  immediate unemployment following the pandemic. Only 1 per cent of Kickstart scheme placements were  in  green  sectors;  the  Government  should  ensure  that  future  labour  market interventions are aligned, from the design stage, with its net zero and environmental goals.
A National Nature Service would build much needed long-term capacity in the nature sector  through  an  established  training  pipeline,  while  simultaneously  contributing to the Government’s levelling up, green jobs and long-term environmental goals. The Government should work with nature sector employers to pilot this during 2022.
The Government must ensure lessons are learned from its Green Homes Grant voucher scheme,  which  failed  to  achieve  its  green  jobs  ambitions;  with  millions  of  homes requiring retrofitting to meet decarbonisation targets, the Government urgently needs to set out a retrofit skills strategy.
[Page #7]
  Green Jobs 
3
In the long-term, the Government will need to ensure that people in regions where jobs will be affected by the net zero transition can access new, attractive opportunities in green jobs. Without such ‘just transition’ planning, there is a risk that livelihoods and consequently wider public support for net zero could be lost as the economy changes.
The  Government  has  committed  to  a  just  and  fair  transition  to  net  zero;  it  should now publish its plan for a just transition. This plan must assess the regional, as well as sectoral, impact of net zero and set out the Government’s strategy for maintaining public support. The plan should also set out arrangements for co-ordination and monitoring across the Government, and collaboration with the devolved administrations and local government. The Government’s just transition planning must include measures to avoid jobs being offshored in the transition; as part of this, the Government should explore how a UK carbon border adjustment mechanism could comply with international trade obligations.
The green skills pipeline will determine both the number and types of UK green jobs which  can  be  produced.  We  need  to  ensure  we  are  training  our  current  and  future workforce now for the careers and demands of the future economy, and make climate and environmental literacy a priority across all education and training. Environmental sustainability should be embedded across all National Curriculum and A Level courses, and a module on sustainability included in every apprenticeship and T Level course. The Government’s Children and Nature programme should be extended beyond March 2022 and expanded to further widen schoolchildren’s access to nature.
Extending the equivalent or lower funding rule exemption to full-time courses in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) and geography and environmental higher education courses would provide a faster route to retraining in higher level skills crucial to the future green economy.
Skills assessment and planning cannot be a one-off exercise; the Government must put structures in place to ensure ongoing monitoring of green skills demands and provision, including ensuring there is sufficient provision of technical and practical education in green skills today to meet the demands of the future economy.
A lack of diversity and inclusion is already an issue in UK environmental and STEM professions; if diversity and inclusion is not factored in from the start, any action to stimulate green jobs risks exacerbating inequalities and missing the opportunities from increased diversity and inclusion in the green workforce. We welcome the Government’s commitment to increasing diversity and inclusion in the green workforce; to be able to  monitor  whether  it  is  succeeding,  the  Government  needs  to  set  out  its  aims  in  a measurable way and have a metric for measuring diversity and inclusion in the green workforce.
The  Government’s  green  jobs  and  just  transition  delivery  plans  must  also  include improvements to careers advice, so people know what green jobs there are and how to access them, and identifying and addressing potential barriers, such as lack of public transport, rural broadband or care provision for dependents, to accessing these jobs.
[Page #8]
4
  Green Jobs 
1  Green jobs ambitions
Introduction
1.  We launched our inquiry into Green jobs and the just transition on 17th November 2020,1 following the Government’s announcements of its ambitions to ‘create 2 million green jobs’ by 2030,2 the allocation of £3bn ‘to support 140,000 green jobs’ through the Treasury’s Plan for Jobs,3 and the £40m Green Recovery Challenge Fund for jobs in nature recovery.4 To support these ambitions, the Government convened a Green Jobs Taskforce, chaired by Ministers from the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy and Department for Education, which worked with representatives from industry, trade unions and the skills sector to ‘support the UK to transition to a net zero economy and deliver a green recovery, by developing recommendations for an action plan to support 2 million good quality, green jobs and the skills needed by 2030’.5
2.  The day after our inquiry was launched, the Prime Minister issued his Ten Point Plan for a Green Industrial Revolution, ‘to create and support up to 250,000 highly-skilled green jobs in the UK’.6 Over the course of this inquiry, the Government has released further net zero, skills and environmental policy papers which have a potential impact on its ambitions for the creation of green jobs, including the Energy White Paper,7 the Treasury’s Net Zero Review: Interim Report,8 Skills for Jobs White Paper,9 Build Back Better policy paper,10 a £40m second round of the Green Recovery Challenge Fund,11 National Bus Strategy for England,12  Industrial  Decarbonisation  Strategy,13  North  Sea  Transition  Deal,14  England Trees  Action  Plan,15  England  Peat  Action  Plan,16  Transport  Decarbonisation  Plan17  and UK Hydrogen Strategy,18Heat and Buildings Strategy,19 Net Zero Strategy20 and the final report of the Treasury’s Net Zero Review.21 In October 2021, the Government announced 
1 
Environmental Audit Committee, Can green jobs support Net Zero Britain ambitions while building back better from coronavirus?, accessed 11 October 2021HC Deb, 21 January 2020, col 160 [Commons Chamber]; HC Deb, 10 November 2020, col 714 [Commons Chamber].GOV.UK, A Plan for Jobs speech, accessed 11 October 2021GOV.UK, Government’s £40 million Green Recovery Challenge Fund opens for applications, accessed 11 October 2021GOV.UK, UK government launches taskforce to support drive for 2 million green jobs by 2030, accessed 11 October 2021; GOV.UK, Green Jobs Taskforce Terms of Reference (December 2020), p. 1GOV.UK, PM outlines his Ten Point Plan for a Green Industrial Revolution for 250,000 jobs, accessed 11 October 2021GOV.UK, Energy White Paper: Powering out Net Zero Future (December 2020)GOV.UK, Net Zero Review: Interim Report (December 2020)GOV.UK, Skills for Jobs: Lifelong Learning for Opportunity and Growth (January 2021)GOV.UK, Build Back Better: our plan for growth (March 2021)GOV.UK, £40m second round of the Green Recovery Challenge Fund opens for applications, accessed 11 October 2021GOV.UK, Bus Back Better: national bus strategy for England (March 2021)GOV.UK, Industrial Decarbonisation Strategy (March 2021)GOV.UK, North Sea Transition Deal (March 2021)GOV.UK, The England Trees Action Plan 2021–2024 (May 2021)GOV.UK, The England Peat Action Plan (May 2021)GOV.UK, Decarbonising Transport: A Better, Greener Britain (July 2021)GOV.UK, UK Hydrogen Strategy (August 2021)GOV.UK, Heat and Buildings Strategy (October 2021)GOV.UK, Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener (October 2021)GOV.UK, Net Zero Review: Analysis exploring the key issues (October 2021)
2 
3 4 
5 
6 
7 8 9 10 11 
12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 
[Page #9]
  Green Jobs 
5
that 56,000 UK green jobs had been ‘secured and created’ since November 2020.22
3.  Throughout  this  inquiry  we  have  examined  how  green  jobs  could  help  tackle  the anticipated rise in unemployment due to covid-19 in a sustainable way; the jobs, skills and training needed to achieve the UK’s longer-term climate and environmental ambitions; and the planning and work taking place to meet the Government’s green jobs ambitions. In  this  report  we  address  the  jobs  and  skills  issues  identified  in  our  recent  reports  on Electronic  Waste  and  the  Circular  Economy,23  Growing  back  better:  putting  nature  and net zero at the heart of the economic recovery,24 Energy Efficiency of Existing Homes25 and Biodiversity in the UK: bloom or bust?26 Our predecessor Committee previously looked at green jobs and skills in 2009.27
4.  Our  call  for  evidence  received  over  65  written  submissions.  These  showcased the  breadth  of  job  opportunities  in  roles  with  the  potential  to  contribute  to  positive environmental  outcomes  across  the  UK,  encompassing  the  construction  of  straw-bale buildings,28  manufacture  of  bioplastics,29  solar  panel  installation,30  running  eBikes schemes,31 retrofit of diesel busses to electric and hydrogen,32 greening urban roofs,33 and chemical recycling,34 among many, many others. We heard from 27 witnesses during our oral  evidence  sessions,  representing  the  education  and  skills  sector,  local  government, employers and industry, and four Government departments. We also held a roundtable event  with  a  small  number  of  young  people,  to  hear  their  perspectives  on  green  jobs; illustrative anonymised quotes from the event are included in the Annex, and we have summarised the discussion where relevant throughout the report.
5.  The five report chapters cover the five broad themes arising from the evidence we gathered: how the Government is organised to achieve its green jobs ambitions; jobs and skills for a green covid-19 recovery; jobs and skills in the delivery of the Government’s long-term environmental goals and its ambitions for a just transition to net zero; ensuring a green skills pipeline; and diversity, inclusion and access to green jobs. Contributors told 
22 
GOV.UK, Prime Minister’s Ten Point Plan kickstarts green investment boom, accessed 15 October 2021. The Net Zero Strategy published on 19 October 2021 provides further detail of these 56,000 jobs ‘protected and created over the last ten months’ (p. 30), however the accompanying table (pp. 30–34) lists 59,100 jobs. We queried this difference with the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) via private correspondence; BEIS responded that this was because under ‘natural environment’, only 850 jobs had been ‘secured’ (p. 33); the remaining 2,500 Green Recovery Challenge Fund jobs (p. 33) had not been ‘secured’ so were excluded, and the total of 56,600 had been rounded down to 56,000. The largest component of the Government’s analysis is 45,000 jobs ‘supported’ in ‘greener buildings’ (p. 32); this figure is an ‘estimate based on internal [Government] analysis’ (p. 34). We also queried via private correspondence why the sum of the figures in the Technical Annex table containing jobs estimates (p. 331) did not agree to the totals shown; BEIS responded that the totals were rounded to the nearest 10,000.Environmental Audit Committee, First Report of Session 2019–21, Electronic waste and the Circular Economy, HC 220Environmental Audit Committee, Third Report of Session 2019–21, Growing back better: putting nature and net zero at the heart of the economic recovery, HC 347Environmental Audit Committee, Fourth Report of Session 2019–21, Energy Efficiency of Existing Homes, HC 346Environmental Audit Committee, First Report of Session 2021–22, Biodiversity in the UK: bloom or bust?, HC 136Environmental Audit Committee, Second Report of Session 2008–09, Green Jobs and Skills, HC 159-IStrawbale Building UK (GRJ0049)BBIA (GRJ0047)Solar Trade Association (GRJ0035)Lord John Bird (Founder, Chair and Editor-in-Chief at The Big Issue) (GRJ0030)National Express West Midlands (GRJ0007)Hubbub Foundation (GRJ0002)Chemical Industries Association (GRJ0041)
23 
24 
25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 
[Page #10]
6
  Green Jobs 
us that green jobs were essential to the delivery of the Government’s green ambitions,35 and a significant number of contributors stressed the importance of clear policy signalling from the Government, to provide sectors with the confidence to invest in green jobs.36
6.  We  welcome  the  Government’s  ambitions  for  green  job  growth  in  the  UK;  now the  Government  needs  to  set  out  how  these  will  be  delivered.  This  report  sets  out  our recommendations for how the Government should take this forward
Measuring green jobs
7.  The  Government  aims  to  ‘create  2  million  green  jobs’  in  the  UK  by  2030.37  The Government’s  10  Point  Plan  for  a  Green  Industrial  Revolution  sets  out  an  ambition  to support 90,000 green UK jobs within this Parliament and up to 250,000 by 2030 across the ten sectors, or ‘points’, covered in the plan.38 The ambition for 2 million green jobs by 2030 was repeated in the Green Jobs Taskforce Terms of Reference39 and report.40 Mike Hemsley, of the Climate Change Committee (CCC), told us the target of 2 million green jobs by 2030 seemed ‘right for meeting the scale of the challenge’ of the UK’s environmental ambitions.41
8.  The Government has not set out a definition of ‘green jobs’, or how it will measure progress  towards  its  ambitions.  There  is  no  generally-accepted  standard  definition  of a ‘green job’, nor single way to quantify them. The Office for National Statistics (ONS) estimates the number of UK green jobs in two ways:
i)  UK  employment  in  the  Environmental  Goods  and  Services  Sector (EGSS), defined as ‘areas of the economy engaged in producing goods and services for environmental protection purposes, as well as those engaged 
35 
E.ON (GRJ0019); Aldersgate Group (GRJ0050); Electricity North West (GRJ0054); Mr Nigel Yau (Research Assistant at Smith School of Enterprise and the Environment, University of Oxford); Deiana Hristov (Research Assistant at Smith School of Enterprise and the Environment, University of Oxford); Mr Brian O’Callaghan (Lead of Oxford University Economic Recovery Project at Smith School of Enterprise and the Environment, University of Oxford); Dr Stefania Innocenti (Research Associate in Behaviour, Finance and Social Statistics at Smith School of Enterprise and the Environment, University of Oxford); Professor Cameron Hepburn (Director at Smith School of Enterprise and the Environment, University of Oxford) (GRJ0057); NNB Generation Company (SZC) Ltd; Laing O’Rourke; Doosan Babcock; EDF Energy; EDF Energy; NNB Generation Company (SZC) Ltd; Agilia Infrastructure Partners (GRJ0061); EEESafe (GRJ0068)Q15; Q18; Biomass UK (GRJ0013); Rolls-Royce plc (GRJ0018); E.ON (GRJ0019); IEMA - Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment (GRJ0025); Institution of Engineering and Technology (GRJ0031); Solar Trade Association (GRJ0035); BSW Timber Group (GRJ0036); New Anglia LEP (GRJ0037); Engineering Construction Industry Training Board (ECITB) (GRJ0039); Investment Association (GRJ0040); Aldersgate Group (GRJ0050); Environmental Services Association (GRJ0052); Electricity North West (GRJ0054); SUEZ recycling and recovery UK Ltd (GRJ0056); Institute for Public Policy Research (GRJ0059); NNB Generation Company (SZC) Ltd; Laing O’Rourke; Doosan Babcock; EDF Energy; EDF Energy; NNB Generation Company (SZC) Ltd; Agilia Infrastructure Partners (GRJ0061); Chartered Institution of Wastes Management; WAMITAB; UK Resources Council, SUEZ recycling and recovery UK Ltd (GRJ0062); Green Alliance (GRJ0064); Association of Colleges (GRJ0067)HC Deb, 21 January 2020, col 160 [Commons Chamber]; HC Deb, 10 November 2020, col 714 [Commons Chamber].GOV.UK, The Ten Point Plan for a Green Industrial Revolution (November 2020), p. 5. These 10 ‘points’ are: Advancing Offshore Wind; Driving the Growth of Low Carbon Hydrogen; Delivering New and Advanced Nuclear Power; Accelerating the Shift to Zero Emission Vehicles; Green Public Transport, Cycling and Walking; Jet Zero and Green Ships; Greener Buildings; Investing in Carbon Capture, Usage and Storage; Protecting Our Natural Environment; and Green Finance and Innovation.GOV.UK, Green Jobs Taskforce Terms of Reference (December 2020), p. 1GOV.UK, Green Jobs Taskforce Report to Government, Industry and the Skills Sector (July 2021), p. 6Q15
36 
37 
38 
39 40 41 
[Page #11]
  Green Jobs 
7
in conserving and maintaining natural resources’.42 ONS uses 17 relevant activities  to  estimate  EGSS  employment  in  the  UK.43  The  latest  estimate indicates 403,100 people were employed in the UK EGSS in 2018.44
ii) 
Information  collected  from  businesses  through  the  Low  Carbon  and Renewable Energy Economy (LCREE) survey, focussing on (a different) 17 sectors deemed low-carbon or related to renewable energy and defined as ‘economic activities that deliver goods and services that are likely to help the UK generate lower emissions of greenhouse gases, predominantly carbon dioxide’.45  The  latest  estimate  indicates  202,100  people  were  employed  in the UK LCREE in 2019.46
9.  The International Labour Organisation (ILO) defines green jobs as ‘decent jobs that contribute to preserve or restore the environment, be they in traditional sectors such as manufacturing  and  construction,  or  in  new,  emerging  green  sectors  such  as  renewable energy and energy efficiency.’47 We decided at the outset of our inquiry that we would start from, but not be limited by, this definition, to consider the range of green jobs and explore what defines a ‘green job’.
10.  The  ONS  identify  two  further  ways  green  jobs  could  be  measured:  the  sectoral approach, which involves identifying relevant sectors, e.g. renewable energy, and either assuming all jobs in this sector are ‘green’ or deciding which jobs within the sector are ‘green’  and  which  are  not;48  and  O*NET,  a  United  States  database,  which  sorts  jobs  in sectors that could make up a ‘green economy’ into three categories, based on the interaction between skills and the transition to a greener economy.49
11.  Contributors to the inquiry differed in their definitions of a ‘green job’. Luke Murphy, of the Institute of Public Policy Research (IPPR), told us IPPR included ‘professions that 
42 43 
Office for National Statistics, The challenges of defining a “green job”, accessed 11 October 2021Ibid. The 17 EGSS activities used by the ONS are: energy saving and sustainable energy systems; environmental charities; environmental consultancy and engineering services; environmental construction; environmental education; environmental low emissions vehicles, carbon capture and inspection and control; in-house environmental activities; insulation activities; management of forest ecosystems; managerial activities of government bodies; organic agriculture; production of industrial environmental equipment; production of renewable energy; recycling; waste; wastewater; and water quantity management.Office for National Statistics, Dataset: Environmental goods and services sector (EGSS) estimates, accessed 11 October 2021Office for National Statistics, The challenges of defining a “green job”, accessed 11 October 2021. The 17 LCREE sectors used by the ONS are: These sectors are: alternative fuels; bioenergy; carbon capture and storage; energy efficient lighting; energy efficient products; energy monitoring, saving or control systems; fuel cells and energy storage systems; hydropower; low carbon financial and advisory services; low emission vehicles and infrastructure; nuclear power; offshore wind; onshore wind; other renewable electricity; renewable combined heat and power; renewable heat; and solar photovoltaic.Office for National Statistics, Low carbon and renewable energy economy UK: 2019, accessed 11 October 2021International Labour Organization, What is a green job?, accessed 11 October 2021. ILO expanded on this in its World Employment and Social Outlook 2018 – Greening with jobs report (May 2018), p. 53: ‘Green jobs are defined as follows: they reduce the consumption of energy and raw materials, limit greenhouse gas emissions, minimize waste and pollution, protect and restore ecosystems and enable enterprises and communities to adapt to climate change. In addition, green jobs have to be decent.’Office for National Statistics, The challenges of defining a “green job”, accessed 11 October 2021O*NET Resource Center, Occupational Categories, accessed 11 October 2021. These three categories are ‘Green Increased Demand’: jobs in the existing green economy, which experience increased demand, but the underlying skills and tasks remain unchanged; ‘Green Enhanced Skills’: jobs in the existing economy where the purpose of the occupation remains unchanged, but the impact of green economy activities and technologies causes changes to the skills and tasks involved; and ‘Green New and Emerging’: new types of jobs, created as a result of green economy activities and technologies.
44 
45 
46 47 
48 49 
[Page #12]
8
  Green Jobs 
are needed to secure a sustainable economy, such as health and care workers’.50 Several other contributors considered social care  a  green job,51 with  the Greener Jobs  Alliance noting that ‘jobs in the care and emergency sectors will be essential to deal with climate mitigation measures like health impacts, floods, and other extreme weather events’.52 The Public  and  Commercial  Services  trade  union  included  public  sector  jobs  that  support the transition, such as job centre coaches.53 The National Association for Environmental Education argued all jobs should be considered green jobs, given the existing background of environmental laws and regulations, and the ‘moral imperative’ for all employees to take action to protect the environment.54 Several contributors observed that in a transitioning economy, there is a ‘greening’ of existing jobs alongside growth in green sectors and new green industries.55 This makes it harder to decide whether or not, or to what extent, a job is ‘green’. ONS raise the issue that even a job in a ‘green’ sector could be carried out in a way which has an adverse effect on the environment.56
12.  The participants at our roundtable discussion for young people expressed a similar range  of  views;  some  considered  green  jobs  to  be  focussed  on  the  environment  or  low carbon transition, while others referred to broader issues of sustainability; one thought that all jobs would be green in the future.
13.  Without a clear definition and metric, the Government will struggle to monitor and evaluate  the  impact  of  its  policies  on  the  number  of  green  jobs.  A  clear  definition  and metric from the Government would be valuable to industry, too; EngineeringUK told us it would provide a ‘clearer picture’ of the future demand for the skills associated with green jobs,57 and Enginuity told us ‘if official data cannot demonstrate the growth in a given occupation, it becomes more difficult to prove the need for qualifications, apprenticeships and other […] skills programmes which meet employer priorities’.58
14.  The Rt Hon Anne-Marie Trevelyan MP, then Minister for Business, Energy and Clean Growth at the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, acknowledged to us the difficulties of defining a green job.59 She told us the ONS LCREE survey ‘gives a broad definition of jobs that help the UK generate lower emissions of greenhouse gases […] that will give us that breadth as we move forward’.60 However, as ONS note, LCREE excludes environmental activities beyond carbon reduction, such as recycling or protecting biodiversity, so is ‘often used in conjunction with other measures when a wider estimate of “green jobs” is required.’61
50 51 
Q2UK Women’s Budget Group (GRJ0003); Groundwork UK (GRJ0015); Green New Deal UK (GRJ0058); Greener Jobs Alliance (GRJ0060)Greener Jobs Alliance (GRJ0060)Public and Commercial Services (PCS) trade union (GRJ0044)UK National Association for Environmental Education (GRJ0065)Q4; Q52; Q69; Enginuity (GRJ0009); Miss Nicolle Moyo (Student at University of East Anglia) (GRJ0010); Groundwork UK (GRJ0015); IEMA - Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment (GRJ0025); RSPB (GRJ0028); EAUC - The Alliance for Sustainability Leadership in Education (GRJ0029); Dr Alison Greig (Director of Education for Sustainability at Anglia Ruskin University); Ms Sarah Strachen (Research Assistant at Anglia Ruskin University) (GRJ0032); Greener Jobs Alliance (GRJ0060); Association of Colleges (GRJ0067)Office for National Statistics, The challenges of defining a “green job”, accessed 11 October 2021EngineeringUK (GRJ0038)Enginuity (GRJ0009)Q172Q172Office for National Statistics, The challenges of defining a “green job”, accessed 11 October 2021
52 53 54 55 
56 57 58 59 60 61 
[Page #13]
  Green Jobs 
9
15.  When we asked how the Government would measure its progress towards its green jobs targets, Minister Trevelyan told us the Government would set that out in its Net Zero Strategy,62 and this would ‘identify much more holistically some of those measurement requirements so that we have […] a benchmark from which to work.’63 When choosing a metric, ONS stress the importance of data availability: ‘while a definition is important, without relevant data, measurement using that definition is not possible.’64 To be able to assess whether its policies are leading to green jobs in the sectors and regions they are needed,  the  Government’s  metric  for  counting  green  jobs  must  be  able  to  monitor  the number of green jobs by type and location. It would be efficient if this metric were also able to monitor progress on diversity and inclusion in the green workforce, incorporating our first recommendation in Chapter 5 below.
16.  The Green Jobs Taskforce says a broad approach is needed; one which encompasses delivery of the UK’s environmental goals and the transition to net zero.65 The Green Jobs Taskforce defines a green job as:
employment  in  an  activity  that  directly  contributes  to—or  indirectly supports—the achievement of the UK’s net zero emissions target and other environmental  goals,  such  as  nature  restoration  and  mitigation  against climate risks.66
We agree that the Government’s definition of green jobs should encompass jobs in sectors such  as  nature  and  the  circular  economy  which  will  help  to  deliver  the  Government’s wider environmental goals. It was clear from our evidence session with Ministers that the Government also considers jobs outside of delivering net zero alone to be ‘green’, through Ministers’ references to ecologists, jobs in habitat management and the circular economy, and roles in biodiversity and environmental engagement.67
17.  The Government also asked the Green Jobs Taskforce to consider ‘quality of green jobs’.68 The Green Jobs Taskforce found that existing ONS measures of quality across jobs could  not  be  analysed  to  see  which  jobs  were  in  the  green  economy.69  The  Green  Jobs Taskforce noted ‘significant gaps’ in the wider evidence on green job quality, and said the data available ‘provides a mixed picture, with clear variations in job quality across and within sectors’, with the evidence currently suggesting that ‘not all green jobs are good jobs’.70 Several contributors to our inquiry raised the importance of job quality in green 
62 
Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (GRJ0063) told us: ‘Our Net Zero Strategy, due to be published later in 2021, will set out the government’s pathway for transitioning to a net zero economy, setting how government will look to maximise new growth and employment opportunities across the UK. The Strategy will build on the Ten Point Plan and the sectoral plans we will bring forward in 2020/21. The Strategy will also consider what skills we need in the economy to deliver this transition drawing on the work of the Green Jobs Taskforce.’Q187Office for National Statistics, The challenges of defining a “green job”, accessed 11 October 2021GOV.UK, Green Jobs Taskforce Report to Government, Industry and the Skills Sector (July 2021), p. 15Ibid. p. 15–16. The Taskforce takes a sectoral approach in its report, distinguishing between existing sectors, emerging sectors and sectors ‘experiencing significant transformation’. The sectors it focusses on are: Power; Business and industry; Homes and buildings; Transport; Natural resources (including waste management and recycling); Enabling decarbonisation; and Climate adaptation.Q175; Q177GOV.UK, Green Jobs Taskforce Terms of Reference (December 2020), p. 1GOV.UK, Green Jobs Taskforce Report to Government, Industry and the Skills Sector (July 2021), p. 38Ibid.
63 64 65 66 
67 68 69 70 
[Page #14]
10
  Green Jobs 
jobs.71 We welcome the Government’s commitment to ensuring that green jobs are ‘good quality’72 and support the Green Jobs Taskforce’s recommendation that the Government set out how it will ensure this.73 We emphasise that, to achieve this, the Government will need a way of measuring job quality which can be used in conjunction with its metric for green jobs.
18.  The Government published its Net Zero Strategy on 19 October 2021; disappointingly, this did not contain its definition or metric for green jobs, but noted that ONS “will seek to refine [the Government’s] understanding and measurement of the green economy as the UK transitions to net zero, including looking at such issues as quality of work and diversity within the green economy.”74
19.  There  is  no  single  definition,  nor  single  way  to  measure  green  jobs.  The Government’s ambitions for accelerating the number of green jobs over the 2020s are welcome, but without a clear definition and metric, the Government will be unable to assess whether its policies are leading to good quality, green jobs in the sectors and regions they are needed.
20.  We recommend that, by the end of 2021, the Government set out how it will measure progress towards its green jobs targets; this should include its definition of ‘green jobs’, and how it will measure the number, type and location of these over the 2020s, for the purpose of monitoring and evaluating the impact of its policies.
Co-ordinating delivery
21.  Delivery of the Government’s green jobs targets will require action across multiple Government departments, including:
• 
the  Department  for  Business,  Energy  and  Industrial  Strategy  (BEIS),  which has  overarching  policy  responsibility  for  net  zero  alongside  clean  energy  and industrial strategy;
• 
the  Department  for  Education  (DfE),  which  has  policy  responsibility  for education and skills;
• 
the  Department  for  Environment,  Food  and  Rural  Affairs  (Defra),  which  has policy  responsibility  for  agriculture,  fishing  and  the  environment,  including forestry  and  waste  and  resources,  and  overarching  responsibility  for  the Government’s 25 Year Environment Plan and climate adaptation;
71 
Q41; Q99; Q102; UK Women’s Budget Group (GRJ0003); National Union of Rail, Maritime & Transport Workers (RMT) (GRJ0012); Education and Training Foundation (GRJ0014); Greenpeace UK (GRJ0027); Public and Commercial Services (PCS) trade union (GRJ0044); Environmental Services Association (GRJ0052); Professor Linda Clarke (Professor at Centre for the Study of the Production of the Built Environment (ProBE), Westminster Business School, University of Westminster); Dr Melahat Sahin-Dikmen (Research Fellow at University of Westminster); Prof Christopher Winch (Professor of Educational Philosophy and Policy at Kings College London); Dr Fernando Duran Palma (Senior Lecturer at Westminster Business School, University of Westminster) (GRJ0053); Green New Deal UK (GRJ0058); NNB Generation Company (SZC) Ltd; Laing O’Rourke; Doosan Babcock; EDF Energy; EDF Energy; NNB Generation Company (SZC) Ltd; Agilia Infrastructure Partners (GRJ0061)Environmental Audit Committee, Letter from the Minister of State for Energy, Clean Growth and Climate Change, and the Parliamentary Under Secretary of State for Apprenticeships and Skills, relating to the publication of the Green Jobs Taskforce’s Report, 14 July 2021GOV.UK, Green Jobs Taskforce Report to Government, Industry and the Skills Sector (July 2021), p. 40GOV.UK, Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener (October 2021), p. 239
72 
73 74 
[Page #15]
  Green Jobs 
11
• 
the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP), which has policy responsibility for labour market strategy;
• 
the Department for Transport (DfT), which has policy responsibility for clean transport, including public transport;
• 
the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities (DLUHC), which has policy responsibility for housing; and
•  HM Treasury, which allocates budgets to departments.
As its green jobs ambitions are UK-wide, the Government will need to co-ordinate with the devolved administrations, given that key matters including education and environment policy are devolved, and with local government, who are also affected by the Government’s environmental policies. As Rebecca Pow MP, Parliamentary Under Secretary of State at Defra, noted:
[…] every planning department will have to deliver biodiversity net gain. Every local authority will have to produce a local nature recovery strategy.75
22.  Contributors  told  us  a  joined-up  approach  is  needed  for  cross-Government  action towards green jobs targets.76 The Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment (IEMA) told us:
The challenge of developing the skills and capabilities in the UK workforce to meet our climate and environmental ambitions is not new; indeed, IEMA gave evidence before the Committee in 2009 on this topic. We believe that a  key  reason  that  past  initiatives  have  failed  is  that  no  single  body  has been tasked with responsibility for co-ordinating delivery. Given the long-term nature of the challenge, the need to take a strategic approach across education  and  skills,  business  and  energy,  environment  and  economic policy, a new Green Jobs and Skills Commission or similar body should be established and mandated to take forward the strategy.77
The Green Jobs Taskforce similarly recommended that the Government ‘establish a UK-wide body with national representation to ensure momentum and coherence on workforce transition, including progress in delivery’, with a remit to ‘monitor, drive and report on progress of the transition to a net zero economy that supports good quality green jobs and skills, and to recommend any additional measures required to accelerate delivery.’78
23.  Given the cross-cutting nature of green jobs, it is important that the Government have  effective  structures  in  place  for  monitoring  and  co-ordinating  action  towards  its green jobs ambitions. The National Audit Office (NAO) has found that the Government’s ‘arrangements  for  joint  working  between  departments  on  environmental  issues  are patchy’.79 NAO say that the risks of poor co-ordination in cross-governmental working on 
75 76 
Q175Enginuity (GRJ0009); IEMA - Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment (GRJ0025); EAUC - The Alliance for Sustainability Leadership in Education (GRJ0029); BSW Timber Group (GRJ0036); EngineeringUK (GRJ0038); Engineering Construction Industry Training Board (ECITB) (GRJ0039); SUEZ recycling and recovery UK Ltd (GRJ0056); Association of Colleges (GRJ0067)IEMA - Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment (GRJ0025)GOV.UK, Green Jobs Taskforce Report to Government, Industry and the Skills Sector (July 2021), p. 41National Audit Office, Achieving government’s long-term environmental goals HC (2019–21) 1035, p. 11
77 78 79 
[Page #16]
12
  Green Jobs 
areas such as net zero or long term environmental goals include: departmental priorities taking precedence over wider aims; the lack of a ‘single point of leadership’ to manage interdependencies, trade-offs or policy clashes; difficulties for a department to direct or hold others to account on their delivery, and a lack of ways for information to be shared across  departments.80  It  is  also  important  for  Parliament  and  other  stakeholders  to understand different bodies’ respective responsibilities in order to hold these to account effectively.
24.  While BEIS and DfE were responsible for the Green Jobs Taskforce, the Government has not set out which department will take the lead on green jobs, or how action will be co-ordinated and monitored. Minister Trevelyan told us:
delivering net zero sits with BEIS, but the reality is that this is a genuinely cross-Government challenge. Every single part of Government have a part to play and have responsibilities that they need to deliver in order to help the  nation  reach  its  net  zero  challenge.  The  interesting  and  perhaps  fair challenge that there has been patchy work has to change. […] The point of the Green Jobs Taskforce is to make sure we can give ourselves a very strong base  from  which  to  build  those  next-step  practical  changes,  investments and where we go forwards.81
She told us she and the Ministers from DfE, Defra and DWP who were present at our evidence  session  were  ‘working  together  all  the  time’.82  This  is  welcome;  however,  we think  more  formal  structures  are  still  needed  to  ensure  effective  co-ordination  across the  Government,  including  the  other  departments  with  responsibilities  for  delivering on green job ambitions as well as local authorities and the devolved administrations, to ensure policy alignment, monitor progress and identify and resolve any clashes with other departmental priorities. Such cross-Government oversight might be usefully provided by the cabinet committees on climate action,83 as long as this would also encompass green jobs and skills which are less directly related to climate action, such as those in nature or the circular economy.
25.  In their Ministerial Foreword to the Green Jobs Taskforce report, Minister Trevelyan, then Minister for Business, Energy and Clean Growth at BEIS, and Gillian Keegan MP, then Parliamentary Under Secretary of State (Minister for Apprenticeships and Skills) at DfE, announced ‘the formation of a cross-cutting delivery group to maintain the momentum generated by the Taskforce and drive coherent action across the green skills agenda.’84 The delivery group is to ‘include representatives from industry, the skills sector and other key stakeholders’.85  While  no  further  details  have  yet  been  provided  as  to  the  composition 
80 
National Audit Office, Achieving government’s long-term environmental goals HC (2019–21) 1035, pp. 39, 43; National Audit Office, Achieving net zero HC (2019–21) 958, pp. 32, 34–35Q179Q179National Audit Office, Achieving net zero HC (2019–21) 958, p. 28–29; oral evidence taken by the Committee on 11 March 2021 on Preparation for COP26, HC (2019–21) 222, Q78, ; GOV.UK, List of Cabinet Committees, accessed 11 October 2021. These are: the Climate Action Strategy Committee chaired by the Prime Minister, responsible for domestic and international climate strategy; and the Climate Action Implementation Committee chaired by the Rt Hon Alok Sharma MP (initially in his previous role as Secretary of State for BEIS, and now in his role as President-designate of COP26), responsible for matters related to COP26 delivery, net zero, and building UK resilience to climate impact.GOV.UK, Green Jobs Taskforce Report to Government, Industry and the Skills Sector (July 2021), p. 4GOV.UK, Expert report: every UK job has the potential to be green, accessed 11 October 2021
81 82 83 
84 85 
[Page #17]
  Green Jobs 
13
of  the  delivery  group,  where  it  will  sit  within  the  Government  or  the  co-ordination  or monitoring arrangements which would be put in place, it is welcome that the Government will be tasking a body with delivery of its green jobs goals. To ensure effective delivery of action on green jobs across the Government, the delivery group should, as a priority, set out each department’s responsibilities, how the Government will monitor and co-ordinate delivery across Government, and how the Government will collaborate with the devolved administrations and local authorities.
26.  ‘Green  jobs’  is  a  cross-cutting  issue,  requiring  action  across  Government alongside  co-ordination  with  local  authorities  and  the  devolved  administrations  to deliver the Government’s ambitions. Clear lines of responsibility and a mechanism for co-ordination are needed, otherwise green jobs risks being given insufficient priority within departments, constraining the Government’s efforts to develop the green jobs and skills needed in the economy.
27.  We  recommend  that  the  Government,  in  its  response  to  this  report,  set  out  its arrangements  for  cross-departmental  delivery  of  green  jobs  and  skills  ambitions, identifying:
a) 
each department’s responsibilities;
b)  how it will monitor and co-ordinate delivery across departments; and
c)  how it will collaborate with the devolved administrations and local authorities.
We  recommend  that  these  arrangements  include  tasking  the  cabinet  committees on  climate  action  with  overseeing  the  delivery  of  green  jobs  and  skills  actions  across Government, ensuring that this includes oversight of departments’ actions on green jobs and skills less directly related to climate action, such as those in nature or the circular economy.
Co-ordinating funding
28.  When  we  asked  Kemi  Badenoch  MP,  then  Exchequer  Secretary  to  the  Treasury, in  December  2020  whether  the  Government  would  be  funding  a  dedicated  training programme to support the creation of 2 million green jobs, she told us:
That does not have its own funding stream. It draws together the £3 billion of  green  investment  from  the  summer  economic  update  and  £12  billion from the 10-point plan. For example, part of the green homes grants scheme has a £6.9 million training programme via the Midlands Energy Hub, and that aims to create 5,000 installer training opportunities. We do not have a separate bucket for jobs, but within everything there is an element that will target jobs.86
29.  Given action on green jobs will be spread across the Government, it is important for the costs of action on green jobs to be evaluated, so that departments can account for this in their spending plans and budgeting. The National Audit Office (NAO) says that costed plans are ‘important as otherwise there are risks that decisions about funding allocations are  made  in  a  piecemeal  way,  rather  than  on  the  basis  of  a  strategic  view  of  long-term 
86 
Q318, Energy efficiency of existing homes, 2 December 2020
[Page #18]
14
  Green Jobs 
priorities’.87 NAO say that the Government’s accountability structures, where accounting officers are ultimately responsible for spending in their department alone, can result in ‘targets and performance incentives that prioritise departmental objectives over collective government aims’.88
30.  The  Green  Jobs  Taskforce  Action  Plan  does  not  contain  indicative  costings  for  its recommendations. We asked Minister Keegan whether the Government would respond to the Action Plan by working out how finance will be allocated where it is needed. She responded:
A lot of this will go into the spending review, which is usually what happens when you talk about anything to do with investment. Clearly, at some point we will say how we are going to deliver this, but we already have significant investment in skills. The green jobs skills will come underneath that skills investment, because the system itself is what we are investing in and being able to work with employers to deliver any skills shortage, whether it is in digital or in tree planting.89
In order to ensure sufficient funds are allocated to the departments responsible through the  spending  review,  departments  and  the  Treasury  will  need  to  understand  the  costs of  delivery.  It  would  be  efficient  if  indicative  costings  were  provided  at  the  same  time as  the  information  setting  out  which  departments  are  responsible  for  which  action,  as recommended above.
31.  This  should  include  an  analysis  of  the  funding  required  by  local  authorities  to obtain the green jobs and skills they need to deliver the Government’s nature and climate objectives, including biodiversity net gain, local nature recovery schemes and net zero. The Local Government Association told us that while local authorities had the powers to support the Government’s green recovery and decarbonisation ambitions
through  their  services,  planning  and  enforcement  roles,  housing, regeneration, economic development activities, education and skills, […] a lack of skills and capacity within councils as a result of inadequate funding poses a risk to translating the national vision locally.90
A recent NAO report we requested into local government and net zero in England found that  ‘skills  shortages  for  local  authorities  can  be  made  more  severe  by  the  short  term, competitive nature of much net zero funding from departments.’91 Our recent report into biodiversity  in  the  UK  recommended  that  the  Government  strengthen  local  authority capacity to deliver biodiversity net gain.92
87 88 89 90 91 92 
National Audit Office, Achieving government’s long-term environmental goals, HC (2019–21) 1035, p. 9National Audit Office, Achieving net zero, HC (2019–21) 958, p. 34Q185Local Government Association (GRJ0016)National Audit Office, Local government and net zero in England, HC 304, p. 49Environmental Audit Committee, First Report of Session 2021–22, Biodiversity in the UK: bloom or bust?, HC 136, para 197
[Page #19]
  Green Jobs 
15
32.  When we asked how the additional burdens on local authorities for biodiversity net gain would be funded, Minister Pow told us:
all burdens on local authorities will be covered. Of course, delivering local nature  recovery  strategies  is  something  that  all  local  authorities  will  be required to do, but they can do it with an adopted partner. That might be, for  example,  their  local  wildlife  trust.  Many  of  them  already  have  these plans under way. It will be these other bodies that already have a great deal of expertise and knowledge that will be required for the local authorities.93
In its response  to  our  report  on biodiversity  in  the UK,  the  Government said  it would work  with  local  authorities  to  ensure  access  to  ‘the  right  training,  ecological  expertise and systems to deliver ecological expertise’.94 The Government said it was ‘working with the sector to understand skills and capacity needs’ and has ‘committed to funding new burdens on local authorities arising from the Environment Bill in the usual way.’95
33.  The NAO report requested into local government and net zero in England similarly recommended that the Government work with local authorities to assess the skills gaps for their net zero work.96 The NAO noted that local authorities would require, at the least, ‘the  spending  power  […]  to  build  the  skills  to  incorporate  net  zero  into  their  existing functions such as transport planning’, highlighting that ‘notwithstanding government’s financial  support  to  the  sector  during  the  pandemic,  the  financial  position  of  local government remains a cause for concern’.97 In an evidence session with local government representatives  in  September  2021,  Carolyn  McKenzie,  Chair  of  the  Energy  and  Clean Growth  Working  Group  of  the  Association  of  Directors  of  Environment,  Economy, Planning & Transport told us:
there  is  quite  a  lot  of  external  resource  available  to  us  for  expertise.  But there is a key point that, if it is embedded within the local authority, we can use that small amount of funding to capacity-build within our staff across the council so that it is more consistent and it remains there, rather than being external and then going away. That embedding enables more funding and more capacity to be built.98
34.  It  is  important  that  analysis  by  the  Government  into  local  authority  skills  gaps  is accompanied by an assessment of the funding requirements for the green jobs and skills needed within local authorities, to ensure local government has the green jobs and skills it  needs  to  deliver  the  Government’s  environmental  objectives.  This  will  require  co-ordination between local government, central Government departments and the Treasury.
35.  Departments  need  to  understand  the  delivery  costs  for  their  green  jobs responsibilities to ensure their spending plans include sufficient allocation for this. Any analysis of environmental skills needs in local government needs to be accompanied by an assessment of the funding requirements for the green jobs and skills that are needed within local authorities to deliver local government’s responsibilities towards the Government’s climate and nature objectives.
93 94 
Q199Environmental Audit Committee, Third Special Report of Session 2021–22, Biodiversity in the UK: bloom or bust?: Government Response to the Committee’s First Report, HC 727, para 5Ibid., para 5National Audit Office, Local government and net zero in England, HC 304, p. 14Ibid., p. 9Q77, Mapping the path to net zero, 8 September 2021
95 96 97 98 
[Page #20]
16
  Green Jobs 
36.  We  recommend  that  by  the  end  of  2021  the  department  or  body  with  overall responsibility for delivery of the Government’s green jobs policies should, in collaboration with the different departments engaged in green jobs policy, assign indicative costings to each department’s actions within the overall green jobs delivery plan. This should include  the  Government’s  assessment  of  the  funding  requirements  for  green  jobs  and skills needed within local authorities to deliver the Government’s climate and nature objectives.
[Page #21]
  Green Jobs 
17
2  Jobs and skills for a green covid-19 
recovery
Labour market interventions
37.  While recent labour market statistics show falling unemployment and vacancies at a record high, the impact from the end of the Coronavirus Job Retention Scheme on 30 September  2021  is  yet  to  be  determined.99  The  House  of  Commons  Library  has  found that ‘workers who are from an ethnic minority group, women, young workers, low paid workers and disabled workers have been most negatively economically impacted by the coronavirus outbreak’.100 The Government says it is ‘committed to a green recovery from the [covid-19] pandemic’101 and ‘determined not only to build back better but to build back greener’.102 BEIS told us:
There  is  evidence  from  the  global  financial  crisis  in  2008  that  suggests that in the short-term, green investments, such as renewables and energy efficiency,  are  effective  means  of  delivering  jobs  and  growth  in  response to instances of economic crisis. They offer higher employment and growth pay-offs compared to traditional stimulus measures, thanks to higher jobs multipliers (as in the case of renewables), which boost spending and increase short-run GDP.103
38.  Contributors told us green jobs could play a valuable role in the covid-19 economic recovery. Mike Hemsley, of the CCC, said the labour-intensive nature of many green jobs provided a good opportunity in times of unemployment to bring people into the workforce, e.g. through investment in public transport, walking and cycling infrastructure, nature restoration,  tree  planting,  peatland  restoration  and  flood  resilience.104  Libby  Peake,  of  Green Alliance, listed examples of ‘shovel ready’ green jobs in energy installation, electric vehicle charging and infrastructure and nature restoration.105 Our report Growing back better: putting nature and net zero at the heart of the economic recovery found that action to  counter  the  effects  of  climate  change  and  biodiversity  loss  could  create  jobs,  spur innovation and build economic resilience to future crises.106 The Green Jobs Taskforce has similarly called for the Government to ‘extend its green recovery programmes, directing spending towards low carbon activities with rapid job creation potential, in areas at risk of unemployment.’107
39.  Conversely,  if  economic  recovery  action  is  not  aligned  with  climate  and  nature ambitions,  recovery  action  risks  having  a  negligible  or  even  negative  impact  on  the growth of the green economy and the number of jobs it can support. CCC has warned that 
Coronavirus: Impact on the labour market, CBP8898, House of Commons Library, September 2021, p. 5, 9–10, 14Ibid., p. 4
99 100 101  Environmental Audit Committee, Second Special Report of Session 2021–22, Growing back better: putting 
nature and net zero at the heart of the economic recovery: Government and Bank of England Responses to the Committee’s Third Report of Session 2019–21, HC327, para 29
102  GOV.UK, Green Jobs Taskforce Report to Government, Industry and the Skills Sector (July 2021), p. 3103  Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (GRJ0063)104  Q5105  Q6106  Environmental Audit Committee, Third Report of Session 2019–21, Growing back better: putting nature and net 
zero at the heart of the economic recovery, HC 347, para 48
107  GOV.UK, Green Jobs Taskforce Report to Government, Industry and the Skills Sector (July 2021), p. 37
[Page #22]
18
  Green Jobs 
‘short-term choices aimed at tackling unemployment and inequality, if poorly targeted, could lock in higher emissions in the long-term.’108 RSPB told us ‘a long term zero net greenhouse gas emissions test for government employment schemes would help to ensure that high emissions are not locked-in when tackling unemployment.’109
40.  The Government’s initiatives to get people back into employment include:
• 
the  Kickstart  scheme,  announced  in  the  July  2020  Plan  for  Jobs,  providing 6-month  work  placements  aimed  at  16–24-year-olds  on  Universal  Credit. Under  the  scheme,  the  Government  covers  the  National  Minimum  Wage  for 25hrs  per  week  for  6  months,  plus  £1,500  for  setup  costs  and  employability skills development. £2bn of initial funding was provided, intended to fund over 250,000 jobs;110 and
• 
the  Restart  programme,  announced  in  the  November  2020  Spending  Review, which  will  provide  up  to  12  months’  tailored  support  to  Universal  Credit claimants out of work for at least 12 months. The programme commenced in summer 2021, with £2.9bn funding over 3 years.111
41.  The Green Jobs Taskforce says that ‘Kickstart provides an important model for reaching both  long-term  unemployed  young  people  and  older  workers  at  risk  of  unemployment due to decarbonisation, while also bridging the growing green skills shortages that risk slowing the climate transition’.112 However, Groundwork noted that neither Kickstart nor Restart is particularly aligned with the Government’s environmental or green jobs goals:
The government should ensure that any interventions in the labour market are designed to aid the UK’s transition to a green economy. For example, there are no conditions in the current Kickstart scheme to ensure that the skills and experience young people develop are compatible with our climate and environment ambitions. There is a risk that high carbon industries use the scheme and young people end up with skills which will be redundant in a few years’ time. The same is true of the Restart scheme currently being commissioned by the Department for Work and Pensions.113
Indeed,  policy  documents  available  for  Kickstart  and  Restart  make  no  reference  to  a ‘green’ recovery or the role of the initiatives towards the Government’s climate or nature ambitions.114
42.  We  asked  Mims  Davies  MP,  Parliamentary  Under  Secretary  of  State  (Minister  for Employment) at DWP, to what extent Kickstart and Restart had been designed with the Government’s net zero and environmental goals in mind. The Minister responded:
DWP is uniquely placed to be able to provide support for people into work and into new sectors. In those programmes […] and throughout the work 
108  Committee on Climate Change, Reducing UK emissions: Progress report to Parliament (June 2020), p.15109  RSPB (GRJ0028)110  Coronavirus: Getting people back into work, Briefing Paper 8965, House of Commons Library, August 2021, p. 
5–9
111  Coronavirus: Getting people back into work, Briefing Paper 8965, House of Commons Library, August 2021, p. 
13–14; GOV.UK, How the Restart scheme will work, accessed 11 October 2021
112  GOV.UK, Green Jobs Taskforce Report to Government, Industry and the Skills Sector (July 2021), p. 37113  Groundwork UK (GRJ0015)114  GOV.UK, Kickstart Scheme, accessed 11 October 2021; GOV.UK, Restart scheme, accessed 11 October 2021
[Page #23]
  Green Jobs 
19
that  we  are  doing  around  economic  recovery,  net  zero  and  the  approach that we need as a Government has been front and centre. The work that we have been doing with Government Departments to monitor the evolving economic  and  labour  market  situation  has  been  key  in  terms  of  finding effective  ways  to  help  people  back  into  work  in  the  here  and  now.  I  am delighted that 2,000 of over 200,000 new jobs that have come from nowhere, in terms of the Kickstart scheme, are in the green sector.115
The Minister said she had spoken to people unemployed because of the pandemic who told her that ‘they want to work in that [green] sector and they want to be part of that transition to a low-carbon economy.’116 However, the 2,000 Kickstart placements in green sectors represents only 1 per cent of those the Minister said had been created. It appears a valuable opportunity to boost green skills, experience and employment as part of a green recovery has been missed.
43.  Just 1 per cent of Kickstart scheme jobs were in green sectors. While we understand the need to support current industries, we consider that an opportunity has been missed for a greener employment recovery scheme, to contribute towards the Government’s ‘building back greener’ aims.
44.  We  recommend  that  the  Government’s  net  zero  and  environmental  goals  are considered at the design stage of future labour market interventions, to ensure that such interventions are fully aligned with the green recovery.
National Nature Service
45.  The Environment Secretary has said that ‘restoring nature is going to be crucial as we build back greener from the pandemic’, noting that the UK is ‘sadly one of the most nature depleted countries in the world’.117 In September 2020, the Government launched the Green Recovery Challenge Fund, to ‘kick-start projects to halt the loss of wildlife and tackle climate change, as we build back greener from the coronavirus pandemic.’118 This brought forward £40m of nature funding for environmental charities and partnerships to fund nature projects across England, ‘create up to 3,000 jobs and safeguard up to 2,000 others’.119 In March 2021, this funding was extended by a further £40m.120
46.  Aldersgate  Group  say  creating  jobs  in  nature  restoration  helps  towards  the Government’s  wider  environmental  goals  as  well  as  increasing  ‘physical  resilience  to flooding or landslides, delivering savings in other sectors’.121 The Green Jobs Taskforce includes nature restoration in its list of areas which have ‘high employment multipliers and  can  be  mobilised  very  quickly’,  and  says  there  are  ‘opportunities  in  nature-based job creation which could aid the recovery of those communities across the UK already experiencing  high  unemployment  before  the  pandemic’,  including  the  potential  for 
115  Q177116  Q177117  GOV.UK, Environment Secretary speech at Delamere Forest on restoring nature and building back greener, 
accessed 11 October 2021
118  GOV.UK, Government’s £40 million Green Recovery Challenge Fund opens for applications, accessed 11 October 
2021Ibid.
119 120  GOV.UK, £40m second round of the Green Recovery Challenge Fund opens for applications, accessed 11 October 
2021
121  Aldersgate Group (GRJ0050)
[Page #24]
20
  Green Jobs 
over 16,000 jobs in woodland, peatland and urban park improvement in areas ‘severely impacted by employment challenges.’122
47.  However,  we have  heard that  capacity is a ‘major  issue’  for  the  UK’s  nature  sector due to its reliance on charitable sources of income, with fund-raising efforts made more difficult by covid-19.123 Groundwork told us:
When it comes to the creation of new jobs in the nature sector, the need and appetite outstrip the funding available. The Green Recovery Challenge Fund, for example, was oversubscribed with applications to create nature-based jobs. These roles are, often literally, ‘shovel ready’ and even after the available  funding  was  doubled  to  £80m  it  was  not  sufficient  to  meet  the demand for entry level job creation in the sector. A strategic intervention is needed to meet the scale of the challenge.124
The  Green  Jobs  Taskforce  has  said  that  the  ‘restoration  of  habitats  such  as  peatland, grasslands, saltmarsh and seagrass meadows to provide natural carbon sinks’ will require ‘significant  expansion  across  environmental  and  conservation  professionals,  such  as countryside rangers, forestry workers and horticultural tradespeople’, adding:
There are currently few existing training opportunities or qualifications in peatland or other restoration. There is a need to increase training schemes to meet the labour demand.125
48.  To meet this need, Wildlife and Countryside Link (‘Link’) and other nature sector employers  have  called  for  a  National  Nature  Service:  ‘an  employment  and  training scheme  in  which  tens  of  thousands  of  jobseekers,  particularly  young  people  and  those from  underrepresented  and  disadvantaged  groups,  would  be  employed  and  trained  in environmental projects designed to level up access to nature, address social and health inequalities and bend the curve on nature’s decline.’126 The National Nature Service would arrange 12-month placements with nature sector organisations to carry out ‘shovel-ready’ nature projects such as tree planting, nature-based flood protection and invasive species control.127 Employees would receive the National Living Wage128 and develop transferable and wider employability skills, such as project management and CV writing, alongside environmental  skills,  with  the  opportunity  to  gain  technical  qualifications.129  The proposal focusses on England, noting it could extend across the UK should the devolved administrations also introduce such a scheme.130
122  GOV.UK, Green Jobs Taskforce Report to Government, Industry and the Skills Sector (July 2021), p. 28, 36. The figure of over 16,000 environmental enhancement jobs comes from research by WPI Economics, commissioned by Green Alliance and summarised here: Green Alliance, Jobs for a green recovery: Levelling up through nature (May 2021), p. 1
123  Groundwork UK (GRJ0015)124  Groundwork UK (GRJ0015)125  GOV.UK, Green Jobs Taskforce Report to Government, Industry and the Skills Sector Annex: Sectoral transitions 
to net zero (July 2021), p. 16
126  Wildlife and Countryside Link, Call for a National Nature Service, accessed 11 October 2021; RSPB (GRJ0028) and 
Groundwork UK (GRJ0015) also called for a National Nature Service in their submissions to this inquiry.
127  National Nature Service, National Nature Service Overview and Plan (October 2020), p. 4, 8, 18128  The National Living Wage is set out on: GOV.UK, National Minimum Wage and National Living Wage rates 
(accessed 30 July 2021). The National Living Wage would normally only apply to those aged 23 and over and is set at £8.91 per hour for 2021/22.
129  National Nature Service, National Nature Service Overview and Plan (October 2020), p. 6, 7, 12130 
Ibid., p. 4
[Page #25]
  Green Jobs 
21
49.  A letter to the Chancellor of the Exchequer in June 2020 supporting a National Nature Service was signed by more than 60 organisations,131 and a YouGov poll commissioned by Link in September 2020 found that 83% of the public were supportive of the Government offering  jobs  paid  at  the  National  Living  Wage  to  the  unemployed  to  work  on  projects improving UK nature and the environment.132 The Cambridge Zero Policy Forum has also recommended the creation of a National Nature Service.133
50.  In  our  February  2021  report  Growing  back  better:  putting  nature  and  net  zero at  the  heart  of  the  economic  recovery,  we  recommended  that  the  Government  work with  conservation  charities  to  pilot  the  National  Nature  Service  over  summer  2021.134 Disappointingly, the Government’s response focussed on the Green Recovery Challenge Fund rather than engaging directly with the idea for a National Nature Service.135 When we asked Minister Pow whether the Government had considered introducing a National Nature Service, she told us:
We believe we already have many measures in place that are driving things in  that  direction  anyway.  For  example,  we  set  up  the  Green  Recovery Challenge  Fund,  which  is  an  £80  million  fund,  to  help  with  the  green recovery. The whole focus of it was to create jobs or protect jobs, all of which would work on projects on the green environmental agenda. […] We are in the second tranche of the Challenge Fund right now. We hope by the end of it we will have generated about 2,500 jobs, all of which are in projects right across the environment.136
51.  We  welcome  the  investment  in  nature  provided  by  the  Green  Recovery  Challenge Fund  and  that  the  winning  projects  include  those  with  opportunities  for  training  and skills  provision.137  However,  we  think  the  Government’s  response  rather  misses  the opportunities an established national scheme such as a National Nature Service would provide to build capacity in the sector, contribute towards the Government’s levelling up ambitions, and spur employment for a green economic recovery through helping people back into work while providing them with transferable skills and training. Link says that ‘the furlough scheme and the Green Recovery Challenge Fund has kept environmental NGOs going, but they are in no position to act unilaterally to provide the training required for  16,000  new  jobs’.138  Link  adds  that  ‘no  current  Government  scheme  fits  the  nature 
131  Wildlife and Countryside Link, Letter to the Rt Hon Rishi Sunak MP, 18 June 2020132  Wildlife and Countryside Link, 83% of public say Government should offer nature jobs to those unemployed in COVID-19 crisis and beyond, accessed 11 October 2021; YouGov, YouGov / WCL Survey Results (September 2020). When asked ‘To what extent would you support or oppose the UK Government offering paid jobs, at the living wage, working on projects aiming to improve UK nature and the environment to those who are unemployed?’, 42% responded ‘strongly support, 41% responded ‘tend to support’, 4% responded ‘tend to oppose’, 2% responded ‘strongly oppose’, and 11% responded ‘don’t know’ (YouGov figures given to nearest 1%).
133  Cambridge Zero Policy Forum, A Blueprint for a Green Future (November 2020), p. 4, 46134  Environmental Audit Committee, Third Report of Session 2019–21, Growing back better: putting nature and net 
zero at the heart of the economic recovery, HC 347, para 188
135  Environmental Audit Committee, Second Special Report of Session 2021–22, Growing back better: putting 
nature and net zero at the heart of the economic recovery: Government and Bank of England Responses to the Committee’s Third Report of Session 2019–21, HC 327, para 29
136  Q203137  GOV.UK, Multi-million pound boost for green jobs and nature recovery, accessed 11 October 2021138  Wildlife and Countryside Link, Levelling up through the National Nature Service: Piloting the next step (May 2021), p. 2. The 16,000 new jobs figure referred to by Link and the 16,000 jobs figure referred to in the Green Jobs Taskforce report above both draw from the same analysis, i.e. research by WPI Economics, commissioned by Green Alliance and summarised here: Green Alliance, Jobs for a green recovery: Levelling up through nature (May 2021), p. 1; WPI Economics, Green Renewal – The Economics of Enhancing the Natural Environment (April 2021), p. 2
[Page #26]
22
  Green Jobs 
training need’:
The  Kickstart  scheme139  is  work  rather  than  training  focussed,  with placements lasting only six months. Experience has shown it takes a year to embed fully the transferable skills, employability skills and environmental skills  a  person  needs  to  access  nature  work.  There  is  a  need  for  tailored intervention  to  provide  a  nature  training  pipeline,  to  bring  together  the expertise of the environmental NGO sector and the financial capacity of Government to unlock a wave of nature recovery jobs in high unemployment areas. The National Nature Service would be that intervention, acting as a catalyst to realising the levelling up agenda through new nature jobs.140
52.  Following our recommendation for a pilot scheme, Link produced a proposal for how a one-year pilot could work in practice. Under the proposal, an initial cohort of 100 would be recruited under the co-ordination of a unit in DWP, using the expertise and structures in place for Kickstart, with input from Defra, DfE and BEIS.141 The pilot would require Government  funding  of  just  under  £4.5m,  after  which  private  finance  and  charitable funding would support the extension of the programme beyond one year, in recognition of the benefits of the training pipeline provided by the scheme:
In doing so it would follow the precedent of the Teach First scheme, which started with a pilot programme of just 186 young people in 2003. Government funding allowed the scheme to set up and seize the opportunity its proposers glimpsed; of training up a new cohort of young people to provide a shot in the arm for education, particularly in areas of high unemployment and low opportunity. Over the ensuing two decades Teach First has grown ten times  in  size.  Government  funding  as  a  proportion  of  its  financing  has shrunk over the same time period, as educational organisations and private companies have recognised the value of the training the scheme provides and been prepared to pay to sustain the training pipeline.142
53.  We observe that as the proposal for a National Nature Service includes a focus on areas of high unemployment and an aim to increase diversity in the sector, such a scheme would also help to accomplish the Government’s levelling up ambitions143 and ambitions to increase diversity and inclusion in green jobs.144
54.  We first recommended that the Government pilot a National Nature Service in our report ‘Growing back better: putting nature and net zero at the heart of the economic recovery’.  The  Government’s  response  did  not  engage  directly  with  this  proposal. A  National  Nature  Service  would  build  valuable  capacity  in  the  nature  sector  while providing people with wider employment skills, helping to deliver a green recovery. An established national scheme, rather than one-off funding, would help capacity in the longer term and could have wider reach.
139  The Kickstart scheme is discussed above in ‘Labour market interventions’.140  Wildlife and Countryside Link, Levelling up through the National Nature Service: Piloting the next step (May 
2021), p. 3Ibid., p. 4Ibid., p. 4, 5
141 142 143  GOV.UK, New levelling up and community investments, accessed 11 October 2021144  These are set out in ‘Diversity and inclusion’ in Chapter 5 below.
[Page #27]
  Green Jobs 
23
55.  We  reiterate  the  recommendation  from  our  earlier  report  that  the  Government should work with conservation organisations to pilot a National Nature Service during 2022.
Green Homes Grant voucher scheme
56.  The  Green  Homes  Grant  (GHG)  scheme  was  announced  in  July  2020  as  a  way  to boost green jobs and skills for a sector which had been hit hard by the pandemic, whilst delivering on the Government’s ambitions to improve the energy efficiency of the UK’s housing  stock.145  The  GHG  provided  vouchers  worth  up  to  £5,000  for  energy-saving improvements and was split into 2 parts: a £1.5 billion voucher scheme and a £500 million Local Authority Delivery scheme.146 The scheme aimed to support ‘over 100,000 jobs in green construction’ across the UK.147 In September 2020, the Government launched the GHG skills training competition, which awarded 18 successful applicants £6.4 million to deliver training to support the GHG scheme.148
57.  Our report Energy Efficiency in Existing Homes found that the voucher scheme element was beset with difficulties,149 and ultimately scrapped, contrary to our recommendation that it should be improved and extended.150 Our report identified a lack of consultation with industry for delivery of the scheme, compounded by complexity and delays in issuing the vouchers.151 While the voucher scheme was intended to support the creation of 100,000 green jobs, our report found that it might have actually reduced the sector’s capacity in the  short  term.152  In  the  Government’s  response,  the  Government  acknowledged  that ‘the  Voucher  scheme  was  impacted  by  several  delivery  challenges’  and  ‘some  vouchers have  taken  longer  to  process  than  we  would  have  liked.’153  The  NAO’s  report  on  the GHG voucher scheme, published in September 2021, found that BEIS ‘did not sufficiently understand the challenges facing installers before the Scheme was announced, failing to learn from previous schemes’.154
58.  Issues with the scheme were also raised in the evidence we received in this inquiry. Contributors  highlighted  skills  and  workforce  shortages  to  deliver  the  scheme,155  with the  Mineral  Wool  Insulation  Manufacturers  Association  (MIMA)  noting  that  home retrofits  ‘are  of  course  labour-intensive  and  mostly  done  by  SMEs  [small  and  medium-sized enterprises]’.156 Contributors also expressed concern at the short time frame funding was available to deliver the work.157 E.ON and MIMA called for an end to ‘boom and bust’ 
145  GOV.UK, A Plan for Jobs speech, accessed 11 October 2021146  GOV.UK, Greener homes, jobs and cheaper bills on the way as government launches biggest upgrade of nation’s 
buildings in a generation, accessed 11 October 2021Ibid.
147 148  GOV.UK, Green Homes Grant skills training competition, accessed 11 October 2021; GOV.UK, Green Homes Grant 
skills training competition: details of successful applicants, accessed 11 October 2021
149  Environmental Audit Committee, Fourth Report of Session 2019–21, Energy Efficiency of Existing Homes, HC 
346, para 69
150  Environmental Audit Committee, First Special Report of Session 2021–22, Energy efficiency of existing homes: 
Government Response to the Committee’s Fourth Report of Session 2019–21, HC 135, para 12Environmental Audit Committee, Fourth Report of Session 2019–21, Energy Efficiency of Existing Homes, HC 346, para 69Ibid., para 70
151 
152 153  Environmental Audit Committee, First Special Report of Session 2021–22, Energy efficiency of existing homes: 
Government Response to the Committee’s Fourth Report of Session 2019–21, HC 135, para 10–11
154  National Audit Office, Green Homes Grant Voucher Scheme, HC 302, p. 9155 
Energy Efficiency Association CIC (GRJ0006); IEMA - Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment (GRJ0025); Mineral Wool Insulation Manufacturers Association (MIMA) (GRJ0026)
156  Mineral Wool Insulation Manufacturers Association (MIMA) (GRJ0026)157 
Solar Trade Association (GRJ0035); UK Energy Research Centre (GRJ0042)
[Page #28]
24
  Green Jobs 
cycles in retrofit policy,158 E.ON adding:
The  past  decade  has  seen  the  introduction  and  eventual  scrappage  of schemes  such  as  Zero  Carbon  Homes,  Green  Deal  and  Solar  subsidies amongst others, and as a result both the public and private sector will be sceptical of any short-term programmes introduced.159
This  scepticism  is  unlikely  to  have  been  alleviated  by  the  subsequent  scrapping  of  the GHG voucher scheme.
59.  The Energy Efficiency Association told us that ‘the industry needs to be involved in the design of these schemes’ and that Government agencies ‘need to communicate much more willingly with the businesses delivering the results for them.’160 They highlighted the financial difficulty businesses experienced as a result of delays in the scheme, drawing our attention to
the negative effects an ill-timed announcement of good news can have on job  creation.  By  announcing  a  scheme  to  stimulate  demand  and  create Green  Jobs  without  the  financial  support  to  help  companies  build  the infrastructure to meet that demand quickly enough, the scheme itself can put jobs at risk.161
60.  The GHG voucher scheme was a promising, recent green jobs initiative which did not achieve its objectives due to poor implementation. It is important that the Government addresses the shortcomings in design and implementation of the scheme in a way which informs future green jobs initiatives across this and other sectors. In our Energy Efficiency in Existing Homes report, we recommended that the Government review the preparation, launch, funding and delivery of the GHG programme, and that the recommendations of that review be applied to all cross-Government working on programmes to deliver net zero objectives.162 In its response, the Government noted that two reviews were underway by external bodies; the NAO report into the GHG voucher scheme, and an evaluation by Ipsos MORI, but did not say whether the Government was also reviewing the scheme.163
61.  We asked Minister Trevelyan whether the Government was engaged with contractors so that the redesign or future initiatives do not make the same mistakes. She replied:
I  know  that  Lord  Callanan,  who  has  direct  oversight  of  this  area,  works very  closely  with  the  sector.  As  the  construction  Minister  I  talk  to  them on a macro level, if that is the right way to describe it, on a very regular basis.  I  had  a  meeting  with  the  Construction  Leadership  Council  last week. It is very busy and is wanting to drive forward, particularly with the CO2nstructZero challenge it has set itself, to help all parts of the sector to work in a greener way and to help its customers to build greener homes and, indeed, to help retrofit, which is, as you say, a huge challenge. I am sure the 
158  E.ON (GRJ0019); Mineral Wool Insulation Manufacturers Association (MIMA) (GRJ0026)159  E.ON (GRJ0019)160  Energy Efficiency Association CIC (GRJ0006)161 Energy Efficiency Association CIC (GRJ0006)162  Environmental Audit Committee, Fourth Report of Session 2019–21, Energy Efficiency of Existing Homes, HC 
346, para 73
163  Environmental Audit Committee, First Special Report of Session 2021–22, Energy efficiency of existing homes: 
Government Response to the Committee’s Fourth Report of Session 2019–21, HC 135, para 14.
[Page #29]
  Green Jobs 
25
NAO review, working with the Treasury, will help to identify those and give us the right footing on which to keep working on retrofit strategies as we move forward.164
While  the  NAO’s  report  identifies  lessons  for  future  schemes,165  the  Comptroller  and Auditor General reports to the House of Commons,166 and his reports are not intended to  substitute  for  the  Government’s  own  evaluation  processes.  The  NAO  reported  in September  2021  that  BEIS  was  ‘currently  undertaking  an  exercise  to  understand  what lessons can be learned from the design and implementation’ of the GHG voucher scheme.167
62.  To  address  the  skills  shortage,  our  Energy  Efficiency  in  Existing  Homes  report recommended a national retrofit strategy to provide the necessary training or retraining, to be developed with education providers, which should address the shortage of certified heat pump installers.168 Development of a national retrofit strategy was also recommended by the Royal Institute of British Architects in their submission to our Green Jobs inquiry.169 The Government responded that:
[BEIS] is continuing its work with the Green Jobs Taskforce to produce an Action Plan for Net Zero skills across a range of sectors with the goal of 2 million net zero jobs by 2030. As part of this, for heating, Government is aware that we will need to significantly increase the number of trained installers to deliver our 2028 target of installing 600,000 heat pumps per year. We are working closely with both industry and education providers to ensure that appropriate training is available, both for new entrants to the sector and existing heating installers who do not have heat pump experience. By the end of 2021, we expect industry to have capacity to upskill over 7,000 heating installers per year to install heat pumps.170
However, this response does not address the issue that a holistic strategy is needed, given the multiplicity of skills required in a home retrofit. The Energy Efficiency Association listed  30  different  job  roles  ‘just  to  deliver  the  Green  Homes  Grant’,  including  heating engineers, loft insulation installers and electricians.171 Energy Systems Catapult told us: ‘the few existing training schemes on low carbon are fragmented and insufficient to meet the scale of change required.’172
63.  The Government response points to its work with the Green Jobs Taskforce and its Action  Plan;  while  the  Green  Jobs  Taskforce  report  sets  out  the  scale  of  the  challenge, it  does  not  include  a  retrofit  skills  strategy.173  The  Government’s  Heat  and  Buildings Strategy contains analysis of skills gaps and current shortfalls in training provision and 
164  Q195165  National Audit Office, Green Homes Grant Voucher Scheme. HC 302 , p. 6, 13166  National Audit Office, About us, accessed 11 October 2021167  National Audit Office, Green Homes Grant Voucher Scheme, HC 302 , p. 38168  Environmental Audit Committee, Fourth Report of Session 2019–21, Energy Efficiency of Existing Homes, HC 
346, para 102
169  Royal Institute of British Architects (GRJ0021)170 
Environmental Audit Committee, First Special Report of Session 2021–22, Energy efficiency of existing homes: Government Response to the Committee’s Fourth Report of Session 2019–21, HC 135, para 22Energy Efficiency Association CIC (GRJ0006)Energy Systems Catapult (GRJ0055)
171 172 173  GOV.UK, Green Jobs Taskforce Report to Government, Industry and the Skills Sector (July 2021), p. 20; GOV.UK, 
Green Jobs Taskforce Report to Government, Industry and the Skills Sector Annex: Sectoral transitions to net zero (July 2021), p. 7
[Page #30]
26
  Green Jobs 
capacity  for  retrofit  and  heat  pumps.174  The  Government  says  that  to  meet  demand,  it will ‘incentivise certification’ to British Standards Institution retrofit standards and ‘work with industry to support training and new routes of entry in key skills shortage areas’, and that it is already ‘working closely with industry to ensure appropriate high-quality training is available’ for heat pump installers, and ‘working with the further education sector to increase and improve the availability of training and apprenticeships’.175 This is a start, but falls short of the level of detail and planning needed to meet the scale of the challenge. A national retrofit strategy, which encompasses skills provision for heat pump installation, could help deliver this holistic action and address these skills and capacity shortages.
64.  The voucher element of the Green Homes Grant scheme, the Government’s recent flagship scheme to address covid-19 impact while stimulating jobs in the green sector of home retrofit for energy efficiency, was not a success, and may even have put people out of work; there is a need to rebuild trust with the retrofit sector. Lack of engagement with the industry over the design of the scheme led to it being sub-optimal, resulting in a fragmented and actively disruptive approach to developing skills in a vital sector. The  Government  has  acknowledged  that  the  voucher  scheme  has  not  operated  as intended in this respect.
65.  We recommend that the Government’s own analysis into the Green Homes Grant voucher  scheme  be  completed  during  2021  to  ensure  lessons  learned  inform  future schemes’ designs, and include a plan for industry engagement, to rebuild trust.
66.  The  scale  of  the  challenge  to  retrofit  homes  is  significant,  as  recognised  by  the Government  when  launching  the  Green  Homes  Grant  scheme,  claiming  it  would create  100,000  green  jobs.  With  millions  of  homes  requiring  retrofitting  to  achieve decarbonisation through improved insulation alongside electrification by heat pump installation,  or,  in  due  course,  potentially  hydrogen  insertion  into  the  gas  grid,  the industry  requires  substantial  upskilling  and  an  increase  in  the  trained  workforce across the UK.
67.  In  line  with  our  recommendation  for  a  national  retrofit  strategy  in  our  Energy Efficiency in Existing Homes report, by the end of 2021 the Government needs to set out a programme to encourage the development of relevant skills across the construction trade,  including  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises,  to  stimulate  development  of skilled trades to increase the capacity markedly.
174  GOV.UK, Heat and Buildings Strategy (October 2021), p. 41 - 44175  GOV.UK, Heat and Buildings Strategy (October 2021), p. 42, 44
[Page #31]
  Green Jobs 
27
Case study: The circular economy in the green recovery
Our report on Electronic Waste and the Circular Economy highlighted how circular economy activities, such as repair and recycling, could be a net contributor to jobs and retain value in the UK economy.176 Waste and Resources Action Programme and Green Alliance have calculated that 517,000 jobs could be created through a ‘transformational’ move to a circular economy, through ‘substantial progress in recycling and remanufacturing, but also major development of the reuse, servitisation [provision of goods as a service rather than through ownership] and biorefining sectors’.177 Libby Peake, of Green Alliance, told us investment in the circular economy could boost supply chain resilience, reduce reliance on raw materials, increase profits in the manufacturing sector, help meet carbon budgets, and reduce biodiversity loss caused by resource extraction and processing.178
The Chartered Institution of Wastes Management (CIWM) described the resources and waste sector as ‘a key enabler’ of a green recovery, given its role in ‘improving resource availability and security across the UK economy through the supply of the quality secondary raw materials and feedstocks.’179 The Environmental Services Association (ESA) told us new recycling and waste facilities could provide employment opportunities across the UK.180 CIWM said that growth in reuse and repair required skills in customer service and retail, and so would absorb people from sectors particularly affected by the pandemic, such as retail and hospitality.181
ESA told us that science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) skills were important as new technology in the sector developed.182 CIWM told us there was a need to promote the attractiveness of circular economy careers.183 Dr Adam Read, of SUEZ Recycling and Recovery, told us:
We  have  to  go  much  bigger  and  much  faster  in  making  our  sector interesting, appropriate and flexible for people that would have historically looked at us and gone, “You’re binmen.” Well, we are not. We are resource custodians, we are climate change advocates and we are passionate, and it is the passion that we need to instil in my son’s generation quickly.184
176 
Environmental Audit Committee, First Report of Session 2019–21, Electronic waste and the Circular Economy, HC 220, paras 6, 7, 95, 118
177  Waste and Resources Action Programme and Green Alliance, Employment and the circular economy (January 
2015), p. 2, 3, 44. Page 5 of the report defines servitisation as: ‘any system which increases the effective use of assets. It can include leasing and moving from providing products to services instead, thereby deferring consumption of new assets.’
178  Q13179  Chartered Institution of Wastes Management; WAMITAB; UK Resources Council, SUEZ recycling and recovery UK 
Ltd (GRJ0062)
180  Environmental Services Association (GRJ0052)181  Chartered Institution of Wastes Management; WAMITAB; UK Resources Council, SUEZ recycling and recovery UK 
Ltd (GRJ0062)
182  Environmental Services Association (GRJ0052)183  Chartered Institution of Wastes Management; WAMITAB; UK Resources Council, SUEZ recycling and recovery UK 
Ltd (GRJ0062)
184  Q136
[Page #32]
28
  Green Jobs 
3  Long-term environmental goals and a 
just transition to net zero
Long-term environmental goals
Skills to deliver the 25 Year Environment Plan
68.  The 25 Year Environment Plan (‘25 YEP’) sets out the Government’s goals to improve the environment within a generation.185 It encompasses multiple aspects of the natural environment,  from  air  quality  to  access  to  green  spaces,  and  therefore  has  significant potential to contribute to the growth of UK environmental jobs and skills in these areas. For  instance,  the  England  Trees  Action  Plan,  one  of  the  sectoral  plans  released  under the  25  YEP,  says  thousands  of  green  jobs  will  be  created  through  tree-planting.186 The Resources  and  Waste  Strategy  released  under  the  25  YEP  sets  out  the  Government’s ambitions towards a circular economy;187 SUEZ told us 25,000 to 30,000 additional green jobs are needed in the waste and resources sector to achieve these objectives.188
69.  Achievement of the 25 YEP goals is reliant on a skilled green workforce to deliver the actions required. However, contributors have raised concerns about skills shortages affecting  key  25  YEP  policies  such  as  the  Environmental  Land  Management  schemes (ELMS)  and  biodiversity  net  gain.  In  respect  of  ELMS,  Mike  Hemsley,  of  the  CCC, told  us  ‘there  is  definitely  a  skills  gap  in  training  farmers  and  landowners  to  do  the environmentally beneficial things we want to do with the land’.189 In our recent report Biodiversity in the UK: bloom or bust?, we identified a severe skills shortage in ecologists as  barrier  to  achieving  all  of  the  Government’s  biodiversity  policies  and  highlighted  a shortage  of  ecologists  within  local  authorities  to  oversee  biodiversity  net  gain.190  We recommended that Ministers invest in chartered ecology training and skills as part of the Government’s investment in green jobs.191 IEMA told us they had ‘received reports from a major infrastructure organisation of a lack of capability and capacity to meet […] ecology and biodiversity requirements, especially in the context of biodiversity net gain’ and that it was unclear whether ‘a forward-looking skills and jobs evaluation has been undertaken to  ensure  the  capacity  and  capability  is  in  place’  to  achieve  the  Government’s  circular economy ambitions.192 RSPB told us:
The  UK  workforce  does  not,  and  is  not  on  track  to,  have  the  skills  and capacity needed to deliver the green jobs required to meet its net zero target and other environmental ambitions (including in the 25-year environment 
185  GOV.UK, A Green Future: Our 25 Year Plan to Improve the Environment (January 2018). The 10 goals set out 
in the 25 YEP are: Clean air; Clean and plentiful water; Thriving plants and wildlife; A reduced risk of harm from environmental hazards such as flooding and drought; Using resources from nature more sustainably and efficiently; Enhanced beauty, heritage and engagement with the natural environment; Mitigating and adapting to climate change; Minimising waste; Managing exposure to chemicals; and Enhancing biosecurity.
186  GOV.UK, The England Trees Action Plan 2021–2024 (May 2021), p. 19187  GOV.UK, Our waste, our resources: a strategy for England (December 2018), p. 7, 31–34, 60–62188 189  Q36190  Environmental Audit Committee, First Report of Session 2021–22, Biodiversity in the UK: bloom or bust?, HC 136, 
SUEZ recycling and recovery UK Ltd (GRJ0056)
SummaryIbid., para 81IEMA - Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment (GRJ0025)
191 192 
[Page #33]
  Green Jobs 
29
plan). There is a risk that without investment in skills training now, there will be a nature skills (ecology, land management, species conservation) gap for new nature jobs that the economy needs for schemes such as ELMS, net-gain, and the Nature Recovery Network, which are needed to deliver the green jobs required to meet our net-zero target and other environmental ambitions (including in the 25-year environment plan).193
70.  Neither the 25 YEP nor any of the plans and strategies under the 25 YEP released to date, such as the Resources and Waste Strategy,194 the Clean Air Strategy,195 the England Trees  Action  Plan196  or  the  Peat  Action  Plan,197  include  a  plan  for  addressing  skills shortages,  or  generating  the  jobs  needed  to  deliver  the  required  actions  and  outcomes. The NAO say to deliver its long-term environmental goals, the Government ‘will need to ensure that organisations across the delivery chain have access to the skills and resources they need to play their part’.198 In January 2021, the Public Accounts Committee said the Government had more to do to assess skills gaps and recommended that the Government ‘establish what skills gaps exist, across the key delivery partners and sectors, which are likely  to  inhibit  government’s  progress  in  achieving  its  environmental  ambitions’,  and ‘develop  a realistic  plan  to  close’  such  gaps.199 IEMA called  for ‘all new  green policies, strategies and laws [to] be accompanied by an explicit consideration of the skills needed for effective implementation and a green skills plan setting out how any skills gaps will be addressed.’200 This would include further sectoral strategies under the 25 YEP, such as the Nature Strategy, expected in autumn 2021.201
71.  When we asked what the Government was doing to understand and address skills shortages  for  delivery  of  the  25  YEP,  Minister  Pow  told  us  ‘there  is  a  huge  amount  of thinking going on in Defra’ and Defra was ‘working very hard, at pace, on a plan for what the skills gap actually is’.202 She told us:
One of the things that farmers are crying out for is to have advisers on the ground to help them steer their way through all the choices they will have for the new projects that they can get into in order to access the replacement for the basic payment, to access the [ELMS] funding. We are very conscious of that. There is a lot of work already started on it but also a great more to do, and we think our skills gap plan will help us to identify what exactly we need to focus on.203
Defra’s Skills Gap Plan has the potential to be a valuable tool. To be effective, the Skills Gap  Plan  should  identify  both  the  skills  and  jobs  needed  to  deliver  the  25  YEP,  assess the number of people employed currently in these jobs and in the pipeline, and include a plan of action to address any shortfalls identified. The Skills Gap Plan should be aligned 
193  RSPB (GRJ0028)194  GOV.UK, Our waste, our resources: a strategy for England (December 2018)195  GOV.UK, Clean Air Strategy 2019 (January 2019)196  GOV.UK, The England Trees Action Plan 2021–2024 (May 2021)197  GOV.UK, The England Peat Action Plan (May 2021)198  National Audit Office, Achieving government’s long-term environmental goals, HC (2019–21) 958, p. 45199  Public Accounts Committee, Fortieth Report of Session 2019–21, Achieving government’s long-term 
environmental goals, HC 927, Summary, para 4IEMA - Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment (GRJ0025)
200 201  National Audit Office, Achieving net zero HC (2019–21) 1035, p. 44–45202  Q175203  Q176
[Page #34]
30
  Green Jobs 
with the sectoral strategies and plans already released under the 25 YEP and forthcoming plans, such as the Nature Strategy.
72.  We  have  heard  concerns  that  skills  shortages  will  affect  delivery  of  the Government’s long-term environmental goals, as set out in the 25 Year Environment Plan. It is welcome that Defra are currently working on a Skills Gap Plan to identify where there are skills shortages and collaborating with other departments on this.
73.  We  recommend  that  Defra’s  Skills  Gap  Plan  cover  all  areas  of  the  25  Year Environment Plan and be accompanied by an Action Plan to address skills shortages, developed in co-ordination with the Department for Education and stakeholders. The Skills Gap Plan and Action Plan ought to be published by March 2022 at the latest and aligned with Defra’s existing and forthcoming sectoral plans and strategies, such as the Waste and Resources, Clean Air, Trees, Peat and Nature strategies.
Just transition to net zero
Regional planning and support
74.  The transition to net zero will have an impact across the economy,204 as it will ‘require decarbonisation  of  all  sectors.’205  The  Government  tasked  the  Green  Jobs  Taskforce with identifying ‘options to support a just transition for people working in high carbon industries  and  enable  them  to  mobilise  their  skills  in  support  of  net  zero’,  with  ‘Just transition & retraining for high carbon workers’ listed as one of the Green Jobs Taskforce’s four priority workstreams.206
75.  The  International  Labour  Organization  (ILO)  describes  a  just  transition  as  a transition  towards  an  environmentally  sustainable  economy  that  is  well  managed  and contributes  to  the  goals  of  decent  work  for  all,  social  inclusion  and  the  eradication  of poverty.207 Samantha Smith, of the Just Transition Centre, told us that a just transition can  be  summarised  roughly  as  ‘what  the  social  partners—employers  and  unions,  plus usually Governments—can negotiate to get this very rapid, ideally pretty smooth, process of bringing down emissions without putting a lot of people out of work or creating social unrest.’208 BEIS told us:
Ensuring  that  our  transition  is  a  just  and  fair  one  for  workers  and households  is  a  priority  for  this  government.  The  government  will  make sure that our growing green economy is inclusive, benefitting people across the UK, supporting workers as industries transform and ensuring costs as well  as  the  benefits  are  shared  fairly,  protecting  consumers,  workers  and businesses.209
This  aligns  with  the  Government’s  levelling  up  ambitions,  as  set  out  in  its  Build  Back Better policy paper.210
IEMA - Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment (GRJ0025)
204 205  Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (GRJ0063)206  GOV.UK, Green Jobs Taskforce Terms of Reference (December 2020), p. 1–2207 
ILO, Guidelines for a just transition towards environmentally sustainable economies and societies for all (2015), p.4208  Q99209  Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (GRJ0063)210  GOV.UK, Build Back Better: our plan for growth, accessed 11 October 2021
[Page #35]
  Green Jobs 
31
76.  We have heard that a just transition is important to ensure the wider public retain support  for  the  net  zero  transition.211  Contributors  told  us  public  engagement  will  be important to a just transition.212 Luke Murphy, of the IPPR, said:
[…] it is about the development of a positive vision, so making sure that we are focused on the journey towards something positive rather than just away  from  something  negative.  The  way  in  which  you  describe  carbon-intensive  jobs  and  communities  that  have  a  long  history  in  that  is  quite important in that regard.213
Contributors told us that engagement with education and training providers, employers and trade unions was also important.214 As noted in Chapter 1 for green jobs more widely, delivering  a  just  transition  to  net  zero  will  require  collaboration  across  Government departments, including BEIS (net zero, energy and industrial strategy), DfE (skills), DWP (benefit,  pension  and  employment  support)  and  the  Treasury,  alongside  co-ordination with local authorities and the devolved administrations.
77.  While net zero is a UK-wide policy, we have heard that the impact of the transition will not fall evenly across the UK.215 Contributors told us there was a need to consider the impact on individual regions, as well as sectors.216 Luke Murphy, of the IPPR, said:
In  Aberdeen,  for  instance,  oil  and  gas  workers  make  up  over  10%  of  the local economy. Therefore, it is not just sectors we need to think about; it is about where they are placed and the impact it is going to have on these places, albeit recognising […] that some of these job losses can be offset by potential new opportunities.217
Mike  Hemsley,  of  the  CCC,  said  while  the  Government  was  not  expected  to  actively manage the whole transition, it should ‘at least do a risk assessment and form some kind of  plan  of  where  interventions  are  likely  to  be  necessary.’218  Groundwork  say  that  the Government should identify where jobs may be lost and work with affected businesses and  individuals  to  ensure  they  can  access  replacement  jobs  in  low-carbon  industries, such  as  home  energy  retrofit.219  Samantha  Smith,  of  the  Just  Transition  Centre,  said the  Government’s  role  included  providing  social  protections  while  ‘jobs  are  changing and disappearing’, citing Spain, which provided a bridge to a pension for older mining 
211  Q17; Q99212  Q18; Q34; Q69; Q99; Q102; Transition Economics (GRJ0022), Platform (GRJ0051)213  Q34214  Q34; Q42; Q69; Q110; Q157; National Union of Rail, Maritime & Transport Workers (RMT) (GRJ0012); Transition Economics (GRJ0022), Public and Commercial Services (PCS) trade union (GRJ0044); Platform (GRJ0051); Green New Deal UK (GRJ0058); Greener Jobs Alliance (GRJ0060); Association of Colleges (GRJ0067)
215  Q39; UK Women’s Budget Group (GRJ0003); Biomass UK (GRJ0013); RSPB (GRJ0028); Royal Society of Chemistry 
(GRJ0034); BSW Timber Group (GRJ0036); Electricity North West (GRJ0054)
216  Q34; Q92; UK Women’s Budget Group (GRJ0003); Professor Dave Reay (Chair in Carbon Management & 
Education at School of Geosciences, University of Edinburgh); Katrine Petersen (Campaign Manager - Narratives at Grantham Institute - Climate Change and Environment at Imperial College London) (GRJ0023), IEMA - Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment (GRJ0025); Solar Trade Association (GRJ0035); Electricity North West (GRJ0054); SUEZ recycling and recovery UK Ltd (GRJ0056); Greener Jobs Alliance (GRJ0060); NNB Generation Company (SZC) Ltd; Laing O’Rourke; Doosan Babcock; EDF Energy; EDF Energy; NNB Generation Company (SZC) Ltd; Agilia Infrastructure Partners (GRJ0061); Chartered Institution of Wastes Management; WAMITAB; UK Resources Council, SUEZ Recycling and Recovery UK Ltd (GRJ0062)
217  Q16218  Q34219  Groundwork UK (GRJ0015)
[Page #36]
32
  Green Jobs 
workers.220 Martin Baxter, of IEMA, told us skills provision also required co-ordination at both a local and national level, to understand ‘first, where places are vulnerable and, secondly, what skills and capabilities they have that can be redeployed in the jobs market’.221 The Green Jobs Taskforce similarly recognised the need for regional, as well as sectoral, action, recommending that ‘where local economies depend on a source of high carbon employment,  government  should  work  with  local  government,  employers  and  workers to diversify local economies, recognising the safety net that is already in place to support workers.’222
78.  The Government needs to understand where, regionally, the impacts of net zero will fall, in order to ensure its policies are supporting all regions and enabling replacement green jobs to flourish. Amy Jenkins, Deputy Director for Clean Growth, Green Finance and Sustainable Behaviours for Net Zero at BEIS, told us that, building on the sectoral work of the Green Jobs Taskforce report, the Government’s next focus would be on locations:
Clearly,  the  next  step,  to  the  conversation  around  new  jobs  created,  is working out where those jobs created are likely to be and where they might offset some of the jobs that may no longer exist on account of our net zero transition and where there might be areas where we need to focus on other opportunities. That can be done at both a regional level and a sectoral level. […]  In  essence,  the  planning  at  a  sectoral  level  has  started.  We  are  also using the taskforce to understand what the state of play is when it comes to regional planning […] so we are starting to understand how we deliver net zero at a local level, to understand what will be the deployment at a local level and what that means in terms of jobs.223
On skills, Minister Keegan told us that local skills improvement plans would feed into the work of the new Skills and Productivity Board.224 The Skills and Productivity Board, and skills monitoring and assessment more widely, is discussed further in Chapter 4.
79.  On  support  for  communities  beyond  green  job  creation,  such  as  pensions  and employability support, we asked Minister Davies what work DWP had done to identify where  support  is  most  needed  by  those  most  affected  by  the  transition  to  the  net  zero economy. She told us:
We have weekly labour market analysis, such as around furlough, and next week we have our updated jobs numbers, so we are constantly looking at this. As DWP, we have to plan for all scenarios in terms of what could be happening to the economy. […] We know that some sectors are going to come to a close and things are going to be difficult. We need to help people know and understand that transition. This is where we are working with Gillian [Keegan] and working with education about it not being a job for life;  it  is  a  life  of  jobs.  […]  There  is  the  headline  labour  market  strategy, and then there is the face-to-face support that you get at DWP. That is why we have things like our rapid response service. That is where, if we know there are large job losses coming down the line in a sector, in an area or in 
220  Q91; Q99; Q101221  Q40222  GOV.UK, Green Jobs Taskforce Report to Government, Industry and the Skills Sector (July 2021), p. 72223  Q207224  Q174
[Page #37]
  Green Jobs 
33
a particular company, we get in early to support people, because we know once you have a job it is much easier to transition into another one.225
80.  The Net Zero Strategy sets out the Government’s ambitions to ‘assess how local areas are  working  to  support  workers  and  communities  with  the  net  zero  transition  across England’;  establish  a  Local  Net  Zero  Forum  to  ‘support  the  establishment  of  clearer delivery  roles  for  local  government  and  provide  a  single  engagement  route  into  HM Government in a coordinated and coherent way’; expand the BEIS Local Programme to help places attract investment and support green jobs, and ‘motivate [and] build public acceptability for major changes’.226 These ambitions are welcome; what is needed now is a detailed, actionable plan to deliver these ambitions across the UK.
81.  We  welcome  the  Government’s  commitment  to  ensuring  regions  are  not  left behind in the transition. To ensure this is delivered, it is vital that the Government carry  out  some  planning  for  a  just  transition  and  how  the  Government  intends  to support it. This must include plans for public engagement to maintain public support for net zero, provision for wider support such as pensions and employability support, and ensuring local skills provision and (re-)training opportunities.
82.  As action to deliver a just transition will require collaboration across Government and  co-ordination  with  local  government  and  the  devolved  administrations,  the plan  also  needs  to  set  out  departmental  responsibilities,  and  monitoring  and  co-ordinating  arrangements.  This  plan  might  be  included  alongside  the  document setting  out  departmental  responsibilities  and  funding,  recommended  in  Chapter  1. The Government’s plan for a just transition should also consider replacement jobs in green sectors less directly related to net zero, such as nature and the circular economy.
83.  Some regions will be particularly affected by the transition. While the Government cannot actively manage the whole transition, it is important to assess where impacts will fall to ensure there are policies for support and replacement green jobs in place, in line with the Government’s levelling up ambitions.
84.  We recommend that a just transition plan:
a)  be published by the end of 2021;
b)  assess regional as well as sectoral impact, to ensure regional skills transitioning 
plus employment and pensions support is in place; and
c) 
include a strategy for maintaining public support for net zero.
As cross-departmental action is required, this plan should set out the departments or bodies co-ordinating just transition action and each department’s responsibilities, alongside plans for monitoring progress and co-ordinating with local authorities and the devolved administrations. The just transition plan should also include plans for stimulating replacement jobs in green sectors less directly related to net zero, such as nature and the circular economy.
225  Q189226  GOV.UK, Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener (October 2021), p. 239, 264, 269, 280
[Page #38]
34
  Green Jobs 
Off-shoring risks
85.  CCC say ‘the design of policies to reduce UK manufacturing emissions must ensure that  it  does  not  damage  UK  manufacturers’  competitiveness  and  drive  manufacturing overseas’,  a  problem  known  as  ‘carbon  leakage’.227  The  UK  currently  addresses  carbon leakage by requiring large manufacturers to pay for emissions allowances from an Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS), with free allowances available to manufacturers at risk of carbon leakage.228 CCC say this alone is unlikely to incentivise long-term decarbonisation in the UK, and recommends work commence on developing either a carbon border adjustment mechanism (CBAM) or minimum imports standards.229 A CBAM, also called a ‘border carbon tariff’ or ‘carbon border tax’, is a tax at the border on imported products based on their embedded emissions, or carbon footprint.230 CBAM would end the need for free allowances and could prompt other manufacturing countries to decarbonise.231
86.  No jurisdiction currently applies a CBAM. The European Commission has proposed the introduction of an EU-wide CBAM from 2023 as part of its European Green Deal: its proposal was released in July 2021.232 A UK CBAM would need to comply with World Trade Organisation (WTO) rules, which aim to prevent discrimination between domestic and imported products, and between WTO member imports.233 There are technical and practical challenges around determining industry and product coverage and calculating the amount of carbon emitted in the production process of imports.234 CCC say fair and effective CBAM proposals need to consider the economic challenges all countries face in the covid-19 recovery, particularly developing countries.235 In our Growing back better: putting nature and net zero at the heart of the economic recovery report, we recommended the Government investigate the merits of CBAM, to accompany work on a carbon tax, as one way of addressing carbon leakage, recognising this would also require measures to ensure that such policies do not adversely impact developing countries.236
87.  Green Alliance told us that a UK CBAM would ‘increase the impetus for all trading partners to lower carbon emissions and prevent carbon leakage’.237 Libby Peake, of the Green  Alliance,  told  us  that  ‘the  UK  should  absolutely  be  developing  border  carbon adjustment’,  with  the  caveats  that  this  should  be  considered  as  part  of  a  package  of measures to combat job and carbon leakage, and that there were ‘considerable practical and legal challenges’ to be overcome.238 EDF told us that:
Approaches  such  as  Carbon  Border  Adjustment  Mechanisms  (CBAM) are gaining greater prominence within the EU; while there will be serious practical challenges in converting these concepts into practical mechanisms, they have the potential to protect domestic industries from unfair carbon 
227  Climate Change Committee, The Sixth Carbon Budget: Manufacturing and construction (December 2020), p. 43228  Climate Change Committee, Policies for the Sixth Carbon Budget (December 2020), p. 101229 230  Climate Change Committee, The Sixth Carbon Budget, December 2020, p. 34231 232  European Union, European Green Deal: Commission proposes transformation of EU economy and society to 
Ibid., p. 102, 104
Ibid., p. 293
meet climate ambitions, accessed 11 October 2021Institute for Public Policy Research, Towards a progressive US-UK trade partnership (June 2021) p. 12Ibid., p. 13
233 234 235  Climate Change Committee, The Sixth Carbon Budget (December 2020), p. 347236  Environmental Audit Committee, Third Report of Session 2019–21, Growing back better: putting nature and net 
zero at the heart of the economic recovery, HC 347, para 229
237  Green Alliance (GRJ0064)238  Q19
[Page #39]
  Green Jobs 
35
competition while giving international competitors incentives to introduce comparable  carbon  pricing.  These  approaches  are  worthy  of  further exploration in a UK context.239
E.ON  also  suggested  that  CBAM  be  considered  as  a  lever  to  help  energy  intensive industries  to  decarbonise,  while  not  being  ‘disadvantaged  compared  to  imports  which are  produced  from  higher  carbon  energy  systems.’240  Peter  Walters,  of  the  Chemical Industries Association, told us that to be effective, a carbon border adjustment measure ‘must provide sufficient carbon leakage protection and be accompanied by a framework of supporting policy to help business invest in the net zero transition, without also restricting trade for UK manufacturers.’241
88.  The Government’s Industrial Decarbonisation Strategy suggests that carbon leakage could be addressed ‘through a range of policy approaches including climate diplomacy and treating imports in ways that seek to compensate for the competitiveness impacts of any asymmetries between trading partners’ climate policies’ and that ‘in the immediate future,  government’s  preferred  method  for  mitigating  the  risk  of  carbon  leakage  will continue to be free allocation of UK ETS emissions allowances, which will be decreasing throughout the 2020s’.242 Amy Jenkins, of BEIS, told us:
First  and  foremost,  the  Government  are  very  much  looking  at  climate diplomacy—we  obviously  have  the  G7  and  we  will  be  working  towards COP26 at the end of this year—to make sure others are acting in step with us  and  are  upping  their  ambition.  At  the  same  time,  we  are  very  much looking through that net zero review from Treasury at what other measures there might be to help mitigate any risk of carbon leakage.243
89.  The Treasury’s Interim Net Zero review did not mention CBAM specifically, but noted that carbon leakage risks could increase without domestic and international mitigation, with ‘treatment of imports’ included in its list of potential options for mitigation.244 The final report of the Treasury’s Net Zero Review discussed CBAM among possible policy options to manage the risk of future carbon leakage, noting that ‘any proposal to introduce a  CBAM’  would  need  to  consider  WTO  legality,  methodological  issues,  consumer  and business  impacts  and  market  effects,  and  concluding  that  ‘further  work  is  required’  to understand the risks of carbon leakage, the relative merits of different policy responses and the implications of other jurisdictions’ actions to address carbon leakage concerns.245 The Government’s response to our recommendation on CBAM in our Growing back better: putting  nature  and  net  zero  at  the  heart  of  the  economic  recovery  report  acknowledged the  importance  of  addressing  the  risk  of  carbon  leakage.246  In  relation  to  CBAM,  the Government told us:
239  EDF (GRJ0048)240  E.ON (GRJ0019)241  Q154242  GOV.UK, Industrial Decarbonisation Strategy (March 2021), p. 23, 35243  Q214244  GOV.UK, Net Zero Review: Interim Report (December 2020), p. 62, 67245  GOV.UK, Net Zero Review: Analysis exploring the key issues (October 2021), p. 22, 37–39, 42246  Environmental Audit Committee, Second Special Report of Session 2021–22, Growing back better: putting 
nature and net zero at the heart of the economic recovery: Government and Bank of England Responses to the Committee’s Third Report of Session 2019–21, HC 327, para 38
[Page #40]
36
  Green Jobs 
[…]  any  trade  policy  measure  must  comply  with  the  UK’s  Free  Trade Agreement (FTA) obligations and World Trade Organisation rules and it is not yet clear how a Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism (CBAM) could be implemented in compliance with this and how effective it would be.247
We consider the risk of carbon leakage to the Government’s green ambitions an important issue which deserves greater awareness; in September 2021 we launched a new inquiry, Carbon  Border  Adjustment  Mechanism,  to  examine  the  role  a  CBAM  could  play  in meeting the UK’s environmental objectives and the issues to be addressed in designing such a scheme.248
90.  There is a risk that the net zero transition could lead to UK job and skills losses if  carbon-emitting  industries  simply  move  overseas.  A  carbon  border  adjustment mechanism (CBAM), recommended in our report ‘Growing back better: putting nature and  net  zero  at  the  heart  of  the  economic  recovery’,  should  be  considered  as  part  of measures to address this.
91.  The Government needs to set out in its just transition plan how it will address this risk. During 2021, the Government should conduct analysis into how a UK CBAM could comply with international trade obligations.
Case study: The oil and gas industry in transition
Oil and Gas UK (OGUK) estimates that in 2030, the oil and gas sector will support over 190,000 jobs, compared to approximately 270,000 in 2019.249 CCC say that the UK’s oil and gas sector is ‘likely to be heavily affected’ by 2050 due to falling international demand for oil and gas, with oil and gas production from the UK Continental Shelf ‘already projected to reduce over coming decades’.250
Contributors told us that there were opportunities for those in the oil and gas sector to transfer into roles in offshore wind,251 carbon capture usage and storage (CCUS),252 hydrogen,253 and decommissioning.254 Platform told us workers had faced barriers in accessing new jobs and re-training in offshore wind, including job vacancies requiring offshore wind experience and expensive retraining courses.255
Andrew Mennear, of BP, told us the underlying skills for CCUS and hydrogen would be science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) skills.256 He told us:
[…]  a  lot  of  the  new  energy  infrastructure  will  be  built  in  the  heavily industrialised areas—many of the areas of the country that are identified as being the targets for levelling up. It will create a lot of opportunities in terms of social mobility as well as locally.257
Ibid.
247 248  Environmental Audit Committee, EAC launches new inquiry weighing up carbon border tax measures, accessed 
5 October 2021
249  OGUK (GRJ0033)250  Climate Change Committee, The Sixth Carbon Budget: The UK’s path to Net Zero (December 2020), p. 285251  Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (GRJ0063)252  Engineering Construction Industry Training Board (ECITB) (GRJ0039)253  OGUK (GRJ0033)254  National Union of Rail, Maritime & Transport Workers (RMT) (GRJ0012)255  Platform (GRJ0051)256  Q158257  Q161
[Page #41]
  Green Jobs 
37
4  Education and skills pipeline
National Curriculum, A Levels and access to nature
92.  Contributors told us that the transition to a green economy means that everyone will need an awareness of climate change and environmental sustainability.258 The National Association for Environmental Education indicated that to facilitate this, all school leavers should have ‘an essential understanding of key environmental issues’:
We say this because a knowledge and understanding of the essence of, and background to, all this cannot be the responsibility of every employer, just as essential numeracy and literacy are not. As with literacy and numeracy, it ought to be the responsibility of schools to work with students to develop appropriate attitudes, knowledge, understanding and skills related to living and  working  as  though  nature  mattered.  Indeed,  these  are  sometimes described as environmental literacy.259
In our recent report on biodiversity in the UK, we highlighted the link between education and  access  to  nature  and  appreciation  of  its  value:  our  recommendations  included  the establishment of a Natural History GCSE, increasing opportunities for outdoor learning and involving schoolchildren in the Government’s afforestation project.260
93.  Despite  the  importance  of  environmental  education,  we  have  heard  that  those with recent experience of the education system do not feel they have the environmental knowledge  they  need.  Meg  Baker,  of  Students  Organising  for  Sustainability  UK  (SOS-UK), told us just 4 per cent of the 3,000 school students SOS-UK had surveyed felt they knew  a  lot  about  climate  change,  with  68  per  cent  wanting  to  learn  more  about  the environment and climate change.261 At our roundtable event with young people, we heard that sustainability is not embedded across the curriculum and that insufficient attention is given to the scale and risks posed by climate change; we also heard anecdotal evidence that despite schools holding events such as climate change awareness weeks, these were not taken seriously by students and were seen as ‘tick-box’ initiatives or a means of boosting CVs rather than a genuine opportunity for learning.
94.  Meg Baker, of SOS-UK, pointed out that environmental education is currently limited to a few subjects in schools.262 The Dasgupta Review also raised the issue of environmental education being marginalised relative to the wider curriculum.263 Aldersgate Group told us that embedding sustainability into all subjects will help to ensure that students going on to work across wider sectors, such as agriculture, engineering, hospitality or media are ‘equipped with the knowledge to further decarbonisation.’264 Professor Josie Fraser, of the Institution of Engineering and Technology (IET), said ‘if we want to move to a completely different economy in the future, we need to overhaul the curriculum and we need to think 
IEMA - Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment (GRJ0025); Aldersgate Group (GRJ0050)
258 259  UK National Association for Environmental Education; UK National Association for Environmental Education; UK 
National Association for Environmental Education (GRJ0065)
260  Environmental Audit Committee, First Report of Session 2021–22, Biodiversity in the UK: bloom or bust?, HC 136, 
para 341, 342
261  Q71262  Q71263  GOV.UK, The Economics of Biodiversity: The Dasgupta Review (February 2021) p. 498264  Aldersgate Group (GRJ0050)
[Page #42]
38
  Green Jobs 
about it from a young age.’265 Martin Baxter, of IEMA, told us:
It has to be done not just as a standalone, it is about how to integrate this into the way you teach physics, the way you teach other subject areas, and the way you enthuse people about this. […] This is about weaving into the education  system  right  from  primary  school  and  beyond  to  demonstrate that we can make change and that they are part of the solution and, in fact, they are going to be critical to that, and that they can get jobs and careers.266
Charlotte  Bonner,  of  the  Education  and  Training  Foundation  (ETF),  said  that  it  was important that a holistic approach be taken to avoid the risk that environmental education in  schools  is  seen  as  niche,  specialist,  only  a  priority  for  some,  or  in  the  worst  case,  ‘a tick box’.267 Aldersgate Group told us embedding sustainability across all subjects could also  encourage  a  broader  range  of  people  into  science,  technology,  engineering  and mathematics (STEM) higher education courses and careers.268
95.  When we asked whether the Government had plans to adapt the curriculum to include sustainability and climate change at primary and secondary level, Minister Keegan told us:
We already have environment education in schools and it is part of primary science, key stages 1 and 2. It is also part of secondary science, key stages 3 and 4, where pupils are taught about the production of carbon dioxide by human activity, climate change and the impact of increased levels of carbon and so on. There are specific modules in geography as well. There is also […] the Oak National Academy, which has a load of lessons and resources to support teachers. It is done by teachers for teachers and it also has a number of additional resources to support this. Therefore, I think we have already done that to some degree.269
The Green Jobs Taskforce has recommended that the Government ‘promote the effective teaching of climate change and the knowledge and skills’ in STEM and other key subjects, and  ‘promote  exemplary  curriculum  resources  (for  example  through  the  Oak  National Academy) and support schools to mainstream climate education into formal qualifications in existing subjects, such as business and design & technology’.270
96.  Limiting education on sustainability and climate change to certain subjects in the national curriculum and A Level courses risks missing a valuable opportunity to show how sustainability relates to all subjects and to embed climate and sustainability literacy across the future workforce. It is welcome that resources to bring sustainability into other subjects are available, but as Professor Josie Fraser, of IET, pointed out, ‘the challenge for teachers with a very packed national curriculum to follow is that, even though there may be resources there that could help them, how do they find the time to build that in?’271
265  Q62266  Q61267  Q72268  Aldersgate Group (GRJ0050)269  Q217270  GOV.UK, Green Jobs Taskforce Report to Government, Industry and the Skills Sector (July 2021), p. 55271  Q62
[Page #43]
  Green Jobs 
39
97.  We have considered whether it would be more effective, and send a greater signal about the  cross-cutting  importance  of  sustainability,  to  embed  environmental  sustainability across the national curriculum and A level courses. We heard that in order to enable this, teachers will need to be supported to incorporate sustainability and climate change into their courses.272 Meg Baker, of SOS-UK, told us that in a survey SOS-UK carried out in 2019, ‘75% of teachers said they feel they have not received adequate training to educate students about climate change and 69% of teachers think there should be more teaching about climate change in UK schools.’273 Martin Baxter, of IEMA, said it was important this issue was prioritised:
This  is  about  everybody  recognising  that  we  have  to  build  a  future  by educating young people, and teachers have to be part of that; therefore, we have to equip them with the time and resource to do it, and build that into their professional development and learning.274
98.  We  asked  Minister  Keegan  whether  teachers  were  equipped  to  deliver  courses  in sustainability and climate change. She told us:
There is teacher education. There are resources that go into that. If I look at  my  own  area  of  FE  colleges,  for  example,  there  is  a  level  5  teaching apprenticeship, or you can do it as a full-time course as well, which has to have sustainability as a part of it. In terms of educating and training the teachers, it is something that is continually evolving. There is investment in teacher training. To be honest, […] if you go around any school it is full of it. […] every school I go into there are eco warriors, eco champions, an eco council, and it is all over the school. Therefore, I think the resources and knowledge the teachers have is very good. There will be teachers who do not feel well equipped, and we need to make sure the investment responds to that as well.275
99.  As noted above, our recent report on biodiversity in the UK recommended increasing opportunities  for  outdoor  learning  and  involving  schoolchildren  in  the  Government’s afforestation  project.276  The  Government’s  response  recognised  ‘the  significant  benefits that learning outside the classroom can have for children’s mental health and wellbeing, as well as their educational and social development’ and highlighted the work of its Children and Nature programme, which
aims to support children from disadvantaged backgrounds to have better access  to  natural  environments.  It  consists  of  three  delivery  projects  and a  separate  independent  evaluation  project,  to  demonstrate  and  improve understanding of the effectiveness of interventions in nature, particularly for schools with the highest proportions of disadvantaged pupils in England. DfE,  Natural  England,  and  Defra  have  worked  together  to  develop  the 
272  Q61; Q77; Professor Dave Reay (Chair in Carbon Management & Education at School of Geosciences, University 
of Edinburgh); Katrine Petersen (Campaign Manager - Narratives at Grantham Institute - Climate Change and Environment at Imperial College London) (GRJ0023); IEMA - Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment (GRJ0025), EAUC - The Alliance for Sustainability Leadership in Education (GRJ0029)
273  Q71274  Q63275  Q218276  Environmental Audit Committee, First Report of Session 2021–22, Biodiversity in the UK: bloom or bust?, HC 136, 
para 341, 342
[Page #44]
40
  Green Jobs 
programme and now oversee its delivery. […] The programme was funded until March 2021 by DfE. Defra and DfE have now committed jointly to funding a reduced version of the programme until March 2022.277
100. In our report, we noted that children from disadvantaged backgrounds and ethnic minorities have particularly low access to green spaces, and that education could provide a crucial lever to address this.278 Increasing schoolchildren’s access to nature is also important to the green skills pipeline through attracting future entrants to careers in nature; Venetia Knight, of Groundwork told us a lack of engagement from diverse groups with nature was one of the barriers to workforce diversity in the nature sector.279 Rather than ending the Children and Nature programme in March 2022, it would be more valuable to the future green skills pipeline, the Government’s ambitions to increase diversity and inclusion in the green workforce,280 and the Government’s 25 YEP goal of ‘helping children and young people from all backgrounds to engage with nature and improve the environment’281 to expand the Children and Nature programme, informed by the findings of the evaluation project, to build on the successes of the programme and further widen access to nature in education.
101.  In  school,  education  on  climate  change  and  environmental  sustainability is  limited  to  a  few  subjects.  It  is  important  that  it  is  included  across  all  courses  to give  all  students  a  basic  grounding  in  environmental  issues  and  to  show  how  their subjects can be useful in tacking environmental challenges, whatever sector they go on to work in. This will ensure the future UK workforce is climate and sustainability literate. A greater awareness of environment and sustainability across the population could lead to increased diversity of people entering green sectors, contributing to the Government’s ambitions for a more diverse and inclusive green workforce.
102. We recommend that environmental sustainability be included across all primary and  secondary  courses  delivered  through  the  National  Curriculum  and  across  A Level  courses.  Teachers  should  be  supported  to  deliver  this,  with  teacher  training and  continuous  professional  development.  We  recommend  that  the  Department  for Education consult all relevant stakeholders during the 2021/22 academic year on the delivery of this recommendation.
103. Our  previous  report  on  biodiversity  in  the  UK  identified  that  education  could provide a crucial lever to address inequalities in access to nature. The Government’s Children and Nature Programme went some way in increasing access opportunities for schoolchildren, however the programme is due to end in March 2022. We consider this misses an opportunity to build on the successes of the programme through expanding the  programme,  to  further  widen  access  to  nature  in  education  and  contribute  to building  a  future  green  skills  pipeline  by  attracting  more  young  people  into  green careers.
277  Environmental Audit Committee, Third Special Report of Session 2021–22, Biodiversity in the UK: bloom or 
bust?: Government Response to the Committee’s First Report, HC 727, para 31
278  Environmental Audit Committee, First Report of Session 2021–22, Biodiversity in the UK: bloom or bust?, HC 136, 
para 341
279  Q136280  These are set out in ‘Diversity and inclusion’ in Chapter 5 below.281  GOV.UK, A Green Future: Our 25 Year Plan to Improve the Environment (January 2018), p. 80
[Page #45]
  Green Jobs 
41
104. By the end of January 2022, the Government should engage with delivery partners and schools in order to extend the Children and Nature programme beyond March 2022 and expand the number of delivery projects within the programme, using the evaluation project findings to inform the design and implementation of this expansion.
Apprenticeships and T Levels
105. Apprenticeships  are  paid  jobs  which  incorporate  on  and  off  the  job  training.282 Apprenticeships  can  be  studied  at  different  qualification  levels,  from  level  2  (5  GCSE passes) to level 7 (master’s degree), and take between one and four years to complete.283 In 2019/20, 719,000 people participated in an apprenticeship in England.284 Apprenticeships and  T  Levels  are  based  on  occupational  standards,  which  are  designed  by  employers and  approved  by  the  Institute  for  Apprenticeships  and  Technical  Education,  a  non-departmental public body sponsored by DfE, which also works with employers to review and update apprenticeships.285
106. T  Levels  are  new  2-year  courses,  launched  in  September  2020.286  T  Levels  are equivalent to 3 A levels and offer an alternative to A levels or apprenticeships for students after GCSE.287 Around 80% of a T Level course takes place in the classroom, with the remaining 20% at an industry placement, in contrast to apprenticeships, where typically 80% of the apprenticeship is on-the-job training and 20% is classroom-based.288 A T Level industry placement may or may not be paid.289
107.  We have heard that apprenticeships are a valuable way to bring skills directly into the workplace. Professor Josie Fraser, of IET, told us apprenticeships provided employers with a ‘bite-size’ route to ‘easy upskilling and retraining for existing employees’, as there was ‘no lag time’ between the skills being gained and applied in the workplace.290 Jane Cooper, of Ørsted, told us apprentices are ‘critical’ to address employer skills gaps.291 Andrew Mennear, of BP, told us apprenticeships ‘will be extremely important’ in the net zero transition, with BP’s  planned  CCUS  and  hydrogen  projects  both  involving  apprenticeships.292  Minister Keegan  told  us  the  masters-level  ecologist  apprenticeship  standard  could  help  address ecology skills shortages in local authorities.293 Several contributors told us apprenticeships could be an avenue to increase diversity and inclusion in the green workforce,294 although contributors also highlighted that certain groups, including women and ethnic minorities, 
282  Apprenticeships and skills policy in England, Briefing Paper CBP 03052, House of Commons Library, September 2020. All UK employers with a pay bill of over £3m per year pay an apprenticeship levy, set at 0.5% of the value of the employer’s pay bill, minus an apprenticeship levy allowance of £15,000 per financial year. The levy is paid via HMRC into an apprenticeship service account, and funds in this account can be used to cover apprenticeship training and assessment costs. Employers who do not pay the levy pay for 10% of apprenticeship training and assessment costs, with the remaining 90% funded by the Government.Ibid., p. 10
283 284  Apprenticeship Statistics, Briefing Paper 06113, House of Commons Library, March 2021, p. 3285  GOV.UK, Guidance: Introduction of T Levels, accessed 5 August 2021; Institute for Apprenticeships and Technical 
Education, Annual Report and Accounts for year ended 31 March 2021, HC 319, p. 7–8
286  GOV.UK, Guidance: Introduction of T Levels, accessed 11 October 2020287 288  GOV.UK, Guidance: Industry placements, accessed 11 October 2020Ibid.289 290  Q59; Q64291  Q134292  Qq161–162293  Q196294  Q65; Q161; Enginuity (GRJ0009); IEMA - Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment (GRJ0025)
Ibid.
[Page #46]
42
  Green Jobs 
are underrepresented currently in apprenticeships.295
108. At  our  roundtable  event  with  young  people,  we  heard  that  fierce  competition  for apprenticeships made it hard to secure a place. We also heard that apprenticeships could help increase diversity and inclusion in green sectors as they provided funded courses and were open to those without a degree, and that apprenticeships could introduce new ideas into an organisation.
109. The  Education  and  Training  Foundation  says  content  relating  to  environmental sustainability is ‘limited’ in occupational and apprenticeship standards.296 Martin Baxter, of IEMA, told us ‘very few apprenticeships are climate enabled in terms of our net-zero future,  yet  we  really  need  to  weave  greening  through  the  whole  of  the  apprenticeship framework so that everybody is able to do their job in a greener way.’297 He added:
I  think  there  is  a  real  opportunity  to  look  across  the  whole  of  the apprenticeships  and,  if  not  all,  the  vast  majority  should  have  elements in  those  jobs  about  how  you  do  that  job  in  a  net  zero  environment  in  a sustainable  way.  […]  That  should  be  a  straightforward  obligation  for  all apprenticeships.298
Several  contributors  similarly  called  for  sustainability  to  be  embedded  across apprenticeships and T Levels.299 Venetia Knight, of Groundwork, called for sustainability to be included in all vocational qualifications:
If you think about a vocational course that starts off with health and safety, we think that sustainability needs to be the second part of the module that everybody does, and then it feeds through into the qualification, because it is not just about green jobs; it is all sectors that have to change.300
110.  We  asked  Minister  Keegan  whether  the  Government  had  considered  adapting apprenticeships to include a module on sustainability in all courses. She told us:
The  Institute  for  Apprenticeships  and  Technical  Education  has  a  green advisory  panel  and  a  green  apprenticeship  advisory  council,  which  is  a whole  load  of  businesses  advising  the  panel  that  has  been  set  up.  What they  are  doing  is  looking  at  the  maps  of  every  single  apprenticeship  and looking at how it maps on to sustainability, how sustainability is part of it and how that needs to evolve. This panel and the council—which, as I say, has a number of employers—are right now going through and considering the  existing  apprenticeship  standards  and  what  that  will  look  like  in  the future.301
295  Q66; Q68; Greener Jobs Alliance (GRJ0060)296  Education and Training Foundation (GRJ0014)297  Q57298  Q65299  Q79; Enginuity (GRJ0009); Education and Training Foundation (GRJ0014); IEMA - Institute of Environmental 
Management and Assessment (GRJ0025); New Anglia LEP (GRJ0037); Aldersgate Group (GRJ0050); SUEZ recycling and recovery UK Ltd (GRJ0056); Association of Colleges (GRJ0067)
300  Q132301  Q219
[Page #47]
  Green Jobs 
43
It is encouraging that the Green Apprenticeships Advisory Panel has been set up to consider how current and new apprenticeships can meet the needs of the green economy, working closely  with  the  Green  Jobs  Taskforce.302  The  Green  Jobs  Taskforce  has  recommended that  the  Government  build  on  this  work  to  ‘map,  review  and  enhance  other  training pathways’, including T Levels, ‘to ensure they support a diverse, inclusive and net zero-aligned workforce across the UK’.303 In its Net Zero Strategy, the Government confirmed that the work of the Green Apprenticeships Advisory Panel would also support T Levels.304
111.  The current lack of inclusion of environmental sustainability across apprenticeships and T Levels represents a missed opportunity for addressing employer green skills gaps by injecting green knowledge and skills directly into the workplace, which could be addressed by incorporating a module on environmental sustainability across all apprenticeships and T Level courses.
112. Apprenticeships are a fast way to bring new skills into a workplace, but climate and environmental sustainability issues are not embedded across them. If they were, this would allow apprentices to apply this knowledge directly to their jobs, addressing employer green skills gaps. This should be extended to the new T Level courses too.
113.  We recommend that a module on environmental sustainability be included in every apprenticeship and T Level course. The Government should consult with stakeholders during the 2021/22 academic year on how to implement this.
Equivalent or lower funding restrictions
114.  In  England,  funding  for  higher  education  (HE)  fees  or  living  costs  is  subject  to Equivalent  or  Lower  Qualification  (ELQ)  funding  restrictions,  whereby  students  who already hold a HE qualification are generally not eligible to receive either tuition fee loans or maintenance support for a second qualification at an equivalent or lower level.305 ELQ funding restrictions have been identified as a barrier for adults seeking to reskill.306
115.  Professor Josie Fraser, of IET, told us this was relevant to those looking to retrain in the transition to a greener economy:
There  are  barriers  currently  for  people  who  want  to  retrain  and  access funding, such as the equivalent and lower qualification rule that basically means  in  England  that  if  you  already  have  a  degree  in  one  subject,  you are  not  eligible  for  student  loan  funding  to  change  direction  and  retrain because, in effect, you have already used your entitlement, apart from in some key subjects. We need to think hard about that and how we increase flexibility so people who are impacted have routes and scaffolding packed around them so that they are able to retrain for the newly focused economy and the greener jobs we need.307
302 
Institute for Apprenticeships and Technical Education, Green Apprenticeships Advisory Panel, accessed 6 August 2021
303  GOV.UK, Green Jobs Taskforce Report to Government, Industry and the Skills Sector (July 2021), p. 9304  GOV.UK, Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener (October 2021), p. 246305  Education Committee, Third Special Report of Session 2019–21, A plan for an adult skills and lifelong learning 
revolution: Government Response to the Committee’s Third Report, HC1310, para 104, 105
306  Education Committee, Third Report of Session 2019–21, A plan for an adult skills and lifelong learning 
revolution, HC 278, para 107
307  Q40
[Page #48]
44
  Green Jobs 
116.  Key among the skills needs for a future, greener economy will be science, technology, engineering  and  mathematics  (STEM)  skills.  Richard  Kendall,  of  the  Humber  Local Enterprise  Partnership,  told  us  while  it  was  difficult  to  predict  employers’  future  skills demands  exactly,  the  foundations  would  be  ‘STEM  subjects  primarily’.308  Imperial College  London  told  us  achieving  the  Prime  Minister’s  10  Point  Plan  for  a  Green Industrial Revolution relies on ‘ensuring a reliable pipeline of highly-skilled STEM talent into the UK workforce’.309 The Green Jobs Taskforce say STEM skills ‘will underpin jobs that  are  key  to  taking  forward  the  green  recovery  and  delivering  net  zero’310  and  that the ‘overall shortage of STEM graduates’ was a barrier to ‘building a sustainable high-quality [further education] workforce able to deliver training for green jobs’.311 BEIS told us it was ‘investing £406 million in maths, digital and technical education’ to address the ‘anticipated shortage’ of STEM skills.312
117.  For  the  2020/21  academic  year,  part-time  honours  degrees  in  certain  STEM subjects  (including  mathematics,  science,  engineering,  technology  and  computing) and  geographical  and  environmental  studies,  are  listed  as  exceptions  from  the  ELQ restrictions.313 However, ELQ restrictions still apply to full-time courses in these subjects.314
118.  We asked Minister Keegan whether the Government had considered lifting the ELQ restriction for full-time courses, given the scale of the net zero transition. The Minister did not respond directly to the part of the question focussed on ELQ restrictions, instead saying that skills bootcamps, 12-to-16-week intensive courses for adults, were open to all who applied, with no eligibility restrictions.315 Short-term courses such as bootcamps are a valuable addition to adult training options. However, it is clear that a 16-week course would not provide an equivalent level of skills or retraining to a STEM or environmental higher  education  course  for  someone  wishing  to  gain  higher-level  skills  needed  by employers during the transition. For instance, the current list of skills bootcamps does not include courses in chemistry, mathematics or ecology.316
308  Q108309 310  GOV.UK, Green Jobs Taskforce Report to Government, Industry and the Skills Sector (July 2021), p. 26311 312  Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (GRJ0063)313 
Imperial College London (GRJ0045)
Ibid., p. 54
Student Loans Company Higher Education Partnership, Equivalent or lower qualification (ELQ) exceptions, accessed 11 October 2021314 Ibid.315  Q212316  GOV.UK, Guidance: List of Skills Bootcamps, accessed 11 October 2021
[Page #49]
  Green Jobs 
45
119.  The House of Commons Education Committee recommended in December 2020 that the Government remove ELQ restrictions for HE courses which ‘meet the skills needs of the UK economy’.317 In its response, the Government noted the ‘number of long-standing exceptions to the ELQ rules’ including for medicine, dentistry and nursing,318 and said it would seek views ‘in early 2021’ on whether ELQ restrictions should be amended, as part of the Lifelong Loan Entitlement consultation.319 This consultation was delayed; in July 2021, the Government said the consultation would take place ‘this year’.320
120. The Government already recognises the value of exemptions from ELQ restrictions for sectors of the economy where it wishes to encourage people to retrain. Extending the existing exemption for STEM and geographical and environmental subjects to cover full-time courses is a straightforward way to enable faster retraining in the higher-level skills needed in the green economy and net zero transition.
121. Extending the equivalent or lower funding rule exemption to full-time science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) and geographical and environmental courses would allow quicker retraining in higher level skills needed in the future green economy.
122. We  recommend  that  the  Government  extend  the  equivalent  or  lower  funding rule exemption to full-time STEM and geographical and environmental courses from 2022/23.
Ongoing skills monitoring
123. The Committee has heard that skills are essential to a green recovery; in fact, they underpin it. The Oxford University Economic Recovery Project told us:
The Government must invest in green skills retraining programs with the greatest  urgency  given  the  unprecedented  size  of  rapid  green  investment following from the pandemic. If skills are insufficient to meet investment needs,  labour  capacity  shortages  could  restrict  the  speed  and  magnitude of economic impact. Economic impact is slowed if contractors must delay projects on account of labour shortages.321
317 
Education Committee, Third Report of Session 2019–21, A plan for an adult skills and lifelong learning revolution, HC 278, para 108
318  Education Committee, Third Special Report of Session 2019–21, A plan for an adult skills and lifelong learning 
revolution: Government Response to the Committee’s Third Report, HC1310, para 105Ibid., para 108. The proposal for a Lifelong Loan Entitlement, set out in the Government’s Skills for Jobs: Lifelong Learning for Opportunity and Growth White Paper (January 2021), would enable an individual to access up to four years’ worth of student loan funding for advanced technical and degree-level courses over their lifetime. It is unclear how this would interact with ELQ restrictions; the White Paper (p. 41) says this will form part of the Lifelong Loan Entitlement consultation.
319 
320  Department for Education, The National Skills Fund: Government consultation (July 2021), p. 29321  Mr Nigel Yau (Research Assistant at Smith School of Enterprise and the Environment, University of Oxford); 
Deiana Hristov (Research Assistant at Smith School of Enterprise and the Environment, University of Oxford); Mr Brian O’Callaghan (Lead of Oxford University Economic Recovery Project at Smith School of Enterprise and the Environment, University of Oxford); Dr Stefania Innocenti (Research Associate in Behaviour, Finance and Social Statistics at Smith School of Enterprise and the Environment, University of Oxford); Professor Cameron Hepburn (Director at Smith School of Enterprise and the Environment, University of Oxford) (GRJ0057)
[Page #50]
46
  Green Jobs 
The Institute for Public Policy Research told us that skills will also underpin the net zero transition:
A  supportive  skills  system  is  vital  to  provide  the  appropriate  training  to facilitate  this  transition.  Without  appropriate  training,  a  vicious  cycle ensues:  if  workers  do  not  receive  appropriate  training,  skills  gaps  in  the low-carbon energy sector will widen. This will lead to slower growth in the industry as a whole, which in turn will limit the number of opportunities for workers to transition from high to low-carbon employment.322
124. There  is  a  need  to  monitor  skills  needs  and  shortages  so  that  action  can  be  taken to  address  these,  and  to  ensure  there  is  a  pipeline  of  skills  to  meet  future  demands. Contributors have stressed this should be ongoing, rather than a one-off. Martin Baxter, of IEMA, told us:
I  am  very  clear  that  this  is  dynamic  and,  therefore,  just  expecting  that we can do this once and it will be fine and it can sit around for the next five or 10 years is not going to cut it. We need to be constantly reviewing and understanding where the skills gaps are and what the timescale is to generate those skills.323
Sue Ferns, of the Trades Union Congress, agreed that this was a ‘dynamic system’ which ‘needs to be actively managed’:
We do not yet know all the skills that we need. We know they will change over  time,  and  I  think  it  needs  to  be  proactively  monitored  and  driven across a range of sectors.324
125. We  asked  Minister  Keegan  what  arrangements  the  Government  would  have  in place for the ongoing monitoring of skills needs in relation to the net zero transition. She responded that work to match skills with skills needs had two strands:
One is the employers being really involved in the qualifications, the design of  the  apprenticeship  standards  and  all  the  technical  education  so  what people study is what they want. The second is in terms of matching up local needs,  the  provision  and  the  awareness  of  the  availability  of  the  options and  where  the  key  skills  are.  That  is  part  of  something  called  the  skills accelerator programme, which we are going to be piloting. Local employers work with local business representative organisations and with local colleges and training providers, to have a local skills improvement plan that is there and can evolve, and it is to make sure that the provision, the careers and everything that backs up from that is based on that local plan.325
126. We also asked how the Government would monitor whether its skills policies were working. Minister Keegan told us:
What we will be looking at measuring is how many people are taking these courses that we have put on, how many adults are going back and reskilling, 
Institute for Public Policy Research (GRJ0059)
322 323  Q55324  Q56325  Q210
[Page #51]
  Green Jobs 
47
how many are engaging in boot camps and how many people are getting a job as a result of the boot camps. They are the outcomes. One of the big strands  of  the  reforms  is  funding  and  accountability.  We  are  trying  to simplify  and  make  funding  easier  but  make  accountability  much  greater as well, so making sure we measure. That is particularly now we have the longitudinal  data,  which  effectively  says  where  people  end  up,  what  jobs they end up in. We are working through what it looks like, and we will be consulting on it as well. That is part of making sure we can clearly measure.326
127.  The Minister also referred to the role of local skills improvement plans and the Skills and Productivity Board, two initiatives set out in the Government’s Skills for Jobs White Paper.327  Local  skills  improvement  plans  are  plans  created  by  employers  and  training providers to better match local skills demand with supply.328 They are being piloted in 2021329 and the Government expects them to cover a three-year period initially and be ‘reviewed  and  updated  regularly’;  no  further  detail  is  provided  in  the  White  Paper  on how often ‘regularly’ is.330 The Skills and Productivity Board is a new independent board of  labour  market  and  skills  economists  to  ‘undertake  expert  analysis  of  national  skills needs  to  inform  government  policy’.331  The  November  2020  letter  from  the  Education Secretary to the Skills and Productivity Board Chair set out the Skills and Productivity Board remit for ‘the next 12 months’;332 it is unclear whether the Skills and Productivity Board  will  continue  beyond  then.  The  Government  say  local  skills  improvement  plans ‘will be informed by, and in turn inform, national skills priorities as highlighted by the new Skills and Productivity Board.’333
128. We welcome the establishment of the Skills and Productivity Board to take a national view  of  skills  needs  and  shortages  alongside  consideration  of  how  skills  can  ‘  promote productivity  growth  in  areas  of  the  country  that  are  poorer  performing  economically’, supported by local skills improvement plans.334 We note that neither the Skills for Jobs White Paper nor remit for the Skills and Productivity Board is particularly focussed on net  zero  or  Government’s  green  ambitions,  although  we  expect  these  will  nonetheless feature significantly in the Skills and Productivity Board’s work.335 We also think that this assessment needs to be ongoing rather than one-off. In such, we agree with the Green Jobs Taskforce, who say ‘the design and delivery of government’s strategy for net zero should include an ongoing assessment of the supply of and demand for skills, which should be kept  under  continued  review’,336  although  we  would  extend  this  to  the  Government’s 
326  Q211327  GOV.UK, Skills for Jobs: Lifelong Learning for Opportunity and Growth (January 2021)328 329  GOV.UK, Skills Accelerator: Local Skills Improvement Plan trailblazers and Strategic Development Fund pilots, 
Ibid., p. 8
accessed 11 October 2021
330  GOV.UK, Skills for Jobs: Lifelong Learning for Opportunity and Growth (January 2021), p. 15331 332  GOV.UK, Letter from Gavin Williamson to Stephen van Rooyen, chair of the Skills and Productivity Board, 11 
Ibid., p. 19; GOV.UK, Skills and Productivity Board, accessed 11 October 2021
November 2020
333  GOV.UK, Skills for Jobs: Lifelong Learning for Opportunity and Growth (January 2021), p. 19334  GOV.UK, Letter from Gavin Williamson to Stephen van Rooyen, chair of the Skills and Productivity Board, 11 
November 2020
335  GOV.UK, Skills for Jobs: Lifelong Learning for Opportunity and Growth (January 2021); GOV.UK, Letter from Gavin Williamson to Stephen van Rooyen, chair of the Skills and Productivity Board, 11 November 2020
336  GOV.UK, Green Jobs Taskforce Report to Government, Industry and the Skills Sector (July 2021), p. 33
[Page #52]
48
  Green Jobs 
wider  long-term  environmental  goals.  We  recommend  that  to  implement  this,  a  body should be tasked with regular periodic reviews. For example, this could be every three years, following the initial period for local skills improvement plans.
129. In particular, it would be valuable if the work of the Skills and Productivity Board included a review of the availability of practical and technical education in green skills, including skills in biodiversity and nature. Contributors have highlighted the role further education can play in delivering the skills needed for a green economy across the UK; the Association of Colleges described colleges as ‘a fundamental piece of the education and skills system as centres of lifelong learning, and as anchor institutions within their communities’,337 and the Education and Training Foundation told us the wide reach of the further education sector could ‘boost diversity across net zero sectors’,338 adding:
The  [further  education]  sector  has  a  critical  role  to  play  in  improving the  appeal,  accessibility  and  relevance  of  careers  in  climate  change,  and sustainability, within the communities it serves.339
130. However, in an evidence session on land-based education held in March 2021, the House of Commons Environment, Food and Rural Affairs Committee heard that there was a ‘very limited’ number of forestry skills providers in further education,340 and that the number of specialist agricultural colleges had reduced from 50 in 1980 to 11 in 2021, with 22 general further education colleges also currently providing specialist land-based education.341 When we asked Minister Pow how the increased demand for those educated in  green  skills  such  as  sustainable  farming  was  being  matched  with  the  provision  of technical green skills training, the Minister replied:
You raise a very important point […] I went to a university that studied all these subjects that we need now, and that links up with Imperial College, and  it  was  closed.  We  need  all  these  things  now  and  all  of  our  team  in Defra  are  working  already—the  farming  Minister  and  myself—on  what we need. In fairness, we already have a committee set up that Lord Curry presides over, which is very much looking at the specific providers that we need, linking into a number of colleges and universities, Harper Adams, the Royal Agricultural University, even City & Guilds, and working with a number of institutions already. We need to work even more closely with them to make sure we absolutely align with the skills that we need.342
It is welcome that the Government is considering the availability of provision of education in practical and technical skills needed to deliver the Government’s objectives; this analysis should  form  part  of  the  Government’s  ongoing  skills  monitoring  work.  We  expect  the Government’s wider skills monitoring to draw on this analysis, as well as the outputs of Defra’s Skills Gap Plan.343
131.  Without closely monitoring current and future skills needs and shortages across the net zero transition, there is a risk that today’s courses and training are not addressing 
337  Association of Colleges (GRJ0067)338  Education and Training Foundation (GRJ0014)339  Education and Training Foundation (GRJ0014)340  Oral evidence taken before the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs Committee on 23 March 2021, Q3341 342  Q176343  Defra’s Skills Gap Plan is discussed above in Chapter 3.
Ibid., Q13
[Page #53]
  Green Jobs 
49
the demands of the future. This monitoring needs to be ongoing, to respond to changes in the economy over the course of the transition. We are particularly concerned that, without such monitoring and planning, the future demand for technical and practical green skills might exceed the available training provision in further education.
132. We recommend that by the end of 2021, the Skills and Productivity Board, or similar body, is tasked with ongoing monitoring of skills needs, with regular periodic reviews, to ensure forward-looking and responsive skills planning which encompasses the needs of  the  economy  in  reaching  the  Government’s  net  zero  and  long-term  environmental ambitions.
[Page #54]
50
  Green Jobs 
Case study: Skills pipeline for battery electric vehicles
There are currently 170,000 people directly employed in the UK automotive industry,344 manufacturing 1.6 million vehicles of all types.345 Of these, 81% are exported, 55% to the EU.346 New conventional cars and vans (internal combustion engines running on petrol or diesel) must not be sold in the UK after 2030; plug-in hybrid electric vehicle cars and vans must not be sold new in the UK after 2035. Therefore, after 2035, the only new cars and vans sold in the UK must be ‘zero emission at the tailpipe’.347
Approximately 80,000 people will need to be trained: 30,000 in battery manufacturing, 50,000 in the supply chain.348 We have heard that the main challenge facing employers across Europe is a shortage of people trained to technician level.349 We were also told that the teaching of STEM subjects, from primary education through to higher and further education, is critical.350 Professor David Greenwood, University of Warwick, told us diversity and inclusion will be ‘one of the biggest answers’ to skills shortages:
We see that we are only addressing a proportion of the population at the moment  in  bringing  people  forward.  The  better  we  can  get  at  diversity and inclusion, from primary school upwards, the more chance we will have of having the right number of qualified people to staff our organisations.351
We have heard that the rules of origin agreed in the UK-EU Trade and Co-operation Agreement mean that, from 1 January 2027, 55% of all vehicles must originate from the UK or EU in order to be sold tariff-free in the EU.352 Therefore, a UK gigafactory wishing to export to the EU must have its supply chain in place and its production line up and running by 1 January 2027. It will be important for the Government to work to this earlier date in its skills and sector planning; we have written to the Secretary of State for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy to emphasise this.353
Faraday Institution, UK electric vehicle and battery production potential to 2040 (March 2020), p. 1Ibid., p. 2Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders (BEV0017)
344 345 346 347  GOV.UK, Government takes historic step towards net-zero with end of sale of new petrol and diesel cars by 
2030, accessed 11 October 2021
348  Q12, Technological innovations and climate change: supply chain for battery electric vehicles, 16 June 2021349  Q11, Technological innovations and climate change: supply chain for battery electric vehicles, 16 June 2021350  Q12, Technological innovations and climate change: supply chain for battery electric vehicles, 16 June 2021351 352  Aldersgate Group (BEV0002); European Union, EU-UK Trade and Co-operation Agreement Rules of Origin Q&A (March 2021), p. 51; Q6, Technological innovations and climate change: supply chain for battery electric vehicles, 16 June 2021
Ibid.
353  Environmental Audit Committee, Letter from the Chair to the Secretary of State, BEIS, concerning the UK 
supply chain for battery electric vehicles, 16 July 2021. The Secretary of State responded in September 2021: Environmental Audit Committee, Letter from the Secretary of State at the Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy, concerning the supply chain for battery electric vehicles, 9 September 2021
[Page #55]
  Green Jobs 
51
5  Diversity, inclusion and access to green 
jobs
Diversity and inclusion
133. Diversity and inclusion was a strong theme in the evidence received, with contributors calling for action to increase workforce diversity and inclusion in the green workforce.354 2017  analysis  undertaken  by  Policy  Exchange  showed  ‘environment  professionals’  to be the second least diverse out of 202 occupations, ahead only of ‘farmers’.355 Research conducted by IEMA, SOS-UK and the Equalities Trust found only 3.1% of environment professionals identify as ethnic minorities.356 We have also heard about a lack of diversity in STEM, important to the future green economy. Professor Josie Fraser, of IET, told us:
Only 9% of engineers are women; that is a huge problem. We do not design solutions for big planetary problems when we are engaging only half of the people on the planet to solve the challenges.357
Contributors told us that retention, as well as recruitment, was important to ensuring a diverse and inclusive workforce.358
134. EngineeringUK  say  addressing  the  diversity  gap  in  engineering  would  not  only address skills gaps, but also ‘create opportunities for all young people in the green economy, regardless of their gender, ethnicity, disability status or socioeconomic background’:
Getting  this  right  is  in  many  ways  a  ‘win-win’  situation.  Not  doing  so will mean that large parts of young people in the UK will be denied the opportunity  to  participate  in,  shape  and  drive  the  green  recovery  of  this country and the country will be denied the diverse and insightful workforce that enables it to thrive.359
IEMA warned that if green sectors failed to change and adapt, ‘there is a danger that it will become irrelevant, and unworthy of support from the communities it seeks to work in partnership with on the transition to a net-zero and sustainable future’.360 Venetia Knight, of Groundwork, told us:
We have all been talking about these issues and the fact that sustainability is  about  all  careers  and  all  jobs,  and  we  need  to  take  people  with  us  on that journey. We need to be training everybody and we need to reach into communities. Again, if we do not have people working in our sector from diverse communities, that reach is not going to happen, so we will just fail to hit our targets if we do not have an inclusive workforce. It is about creating 
354  Q57; UK Women’s Budget Group (GRJ0003); Miss Nicolle Moyo (Student at University of East Anglia) (GRJ0010); 
Sustrans (GRJ0011); Education and Training Foundation (GRJ0014); IEMA - Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment (GRJ0025); EngineeringUK (GRJ0038) National Grid (GRJ0043); Institute for Public Policy Research (GRJ0059)
355  Policy Exchange, The two sides of diversity (March 2017), p. 23356 357  Q59358  Q66; Q136; Q165359  EngineeringUK (GRJ0038)360 
IEMA - Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment (GRJ0025)
IEMA - Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment (GRJ0025)
[Page #56]
52
  Green Jobs 
solutions, but being able to use the diversity of skills and thought to solve the problems in creating environmental solutions.361
135. At our roundtable event with young people, we heard that the lack of ethnic diversity in environmental sectors was discouraging to those wanting to work in those professions, and that their perspectives were necessary to help find solutions to climate problems. We heard that opening up access via apprenticeships and better outreach with entrepreneurial groups could enable people from diverse backgrounds to share their ideas and solutions. We also heard the perception of green jobs as less financially secure could be a barrier.
136. The Government recognised the issue of diversity and inclusion in green jobs from the outset, tasking the Green Jobs Taskforce with looking at how diversity could be increased ‘across green sectors’.362 BEIS told us the Government ‘will make sure that our growing green economy is inclusive, benefitting people across the UK’.363 This is welcome given the scale of the problem; without action to address the lack of diversity and inclusion from the outset, an increase in green jobs could exacerbate existing inequalities while missing out on the opportunities arising from involving a wide range of people and skillsets in addressing the climate and nature challenge.
137.  Alongside recommendations for industry bodies, employers and the education sector, the  Green  Jobs  Taskforce  recommended  that  the  Government  ‘ensure  that  all  bidders for net zero related funding demonstrate best practice in relation to their equality and diversity ambitions and practices, and support transparent reporting of data on workforce diversity’,  ‘explore  if  the  collection  of  [diversity]  data  should  be  enforced,  and  the  data published  regularly’  and  that  ‘appropriate  and  stretching  equality  and  diversity  targets and initiatives to achieve them’ be included in sector deals.364
138. The Government’s ambitions to increase diversity and inclusion are welcome; what is  missing  is  an  articulation  of  the  Government’s  targets  for  increasing  diversity  and inclusion, and a way for the Government to know if it is achieving those ambitions. We asked Minister Keegan how the Government would monitor its progress against its aim to increase diversity in the low-carbon workforce. She responded:
It is a huge and continuing challenge. We have targets on it. The DfE has targets for inclusion, for black and ethnic minorities, for women and also for those with special educational needs. It is continuing to make sure those opportunities are widely available.365
We note that DfE has responsibility for skills and education, rather than green jobs as whole. To be able to monitor its progress towards its aims, the Government needs to set out its ambitions in a measurable way and then measure its progress against these. This will involve addressing the issue raised by the Green Jobs Taskforce that there is not currently a way to measure diversity and inclusion in green jobs.366 It would be valuable, therefore, if the Government’s targets and metric for diversity and inclusion were aligned with its metric for green jobs, as recommended in Chapter 1.
361  Q137362  GOV.UK, Green Jobs Taskforce Terms of Reference (December 2020), p. 1363  Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (GRJ0063)364  GOV.UK, Green Jobs Taskforce Report to Government, Industry and the Skills Sector (July 2021), p. 35, 52365  Q205366  GOV.UK, Green Jobs Taskforce Report to Government, Industry and the Skills Sector (July 2021), p. 42
[Page #57]
  Green Jobs 
53
139. To be able to monitor whether its ambitions to increase diversity and inclusion in the green workforce are being achieved, the Government needs to articulate these ambitions in a measurable way and have a metric for measuring diversity and inclusion in the green workforce.
140. By  the  end  of  2021,  the  Government  should  set  out  its  ambitions  for  improving diversity and inclusion in the green workforce and set out how it will measure diversity and  inclusion  in  green  jobs,  for  the  purpose  of  monitoring  and  evaluating  progress towards its aims.
Enabling infrastructure
141.  We  have  heard  that  it  is  important  that  the  Government  also  consider  the  wider infrastructure which enables people to access green jobs. Groundwork told us:
To  enable  people  to  take  up  green  jobs,  there  must  be  accompanying investment in the parts of the economy that facilitate work. For example, to make work possible people must be able to access care for children and adult dependents and low carbon transport.367
Dr  Joanie  Willett,  of  the  University  of  Exeter,  told  us  people  in  rural  areas  without a  car  are  reliant  on  other  forms  of  transport,  with  the  availability  and  affordability  of public transport having a significant effect on their ability to take up jobs in local labour markets, despite the skills they might have.368 Venetia Knight, of Groundwork, said digital connectivity was an issue for rural communities.369
142. The Government has said it must ensure that green jobs ‘can be accessed by people of all backgrounds and in all parts of the country’.370 The Government’s Build Back Better policy also makes reference to fair access to jobs, wages and skills.371 However, while the Green Jobs Taskforce contains recommendations for access to training opportunities and discusses the need to remove the barriers stopping women and other underrepresented groups from accessing green jobs,372 there are no recommendations relating to this wider, supporting infrastructure for access to green jobs.
143. When  we  asked  Amy  Jenkins,  of  BEIS,  whether  the  Green  Jobs  Taskforce  had considered enabling infrastructure such as internet access, public transport and care, she told us ‘the infrastructure that enables people to reach those jobs has probably come in more at a peripheral level to the Taskforce’s conversations.’373 She added that:
We are really conscious that often people tend to look for work in a locality. That is part of the journey the taskforce has started, to understand the areas of evidence we have around that.374
367  Groundwork UK (GRJ0015)368  Dr Joanie Willett (Senior Lecturer in Politics at University of Exeter) (GRJ0004)369  Q126370  GOV.UK, Green Jobs Taskforce Report to Government, Industry and the Skills Sector (July 2021), p. 3371  GOV.UK, Build Back Better: our plan for growth (March 2021), p. 69372  GOV.UK, Green Jobs Taskforce Report to Government, Industry and the Skills Sector (July 2021), p. 28, 42, 45, 62, 
63, 65373  Q206374  Q206
[Page #58]
54
  Green Jobs 
144. Something  that  has  not  been  considered  in  the  Green  Jobs  Taskforce  report recommendations  is  the  wider  enabling  infrastructure  which  allows  people  to physically  access  green  job  opportunities,  such  as  public  transport,  care  and  rural broadband connectivity. This will involve co-ordination across the Government. This wider infrastructure needs to be factored into the Government’s green jobs and just transition delivery plans from the outset; if people are unable to physically access green job opportunities, this could undermine not just the Government’s ambitions for the number of people seeking and successfully entering green jobs, but also its ambitions for a just transition and diversity and inclusion in the green workforce.
145. The  Government’s  green  jobs  and  just  transition  delivery  plans  should  include analysis of the enabling infrastructure needed for people to access new green jobs, and allocate actions to the departments with responsibilities over this infrastructure.
Careers strategy
146. Contributors  stressed  the  important  role  careers  information  will  play  in  making people aware of green job opportunities and the skills and training they need to access these.375 Richard Kendall, of the Humber Local Enterprise Partnership, explained:
The  bit  that  often  gets  missed  is  being  active  in  identifying  what  the opportunities  are.  This  is  careers  advice.  It  is  all  very  well  jobs  being there  and  the  training  being  there  but,  if  people  do  not  know  about  the opportunity, they are not going to enter it.376
Contributors told us this information was important to those seeking a green job at the start of their careers as well as those looking to retrain or re-enter employment, including as a result of the net zero transition or pandemic impact.377 Furthermore, we heard that improving awareness of green job opportunities and how to access them could attract a wider pool of applicants, increasing diversity and inclusion in the green workforce,378 and could enhance perceptions of the attractiveness of green jobs.379 Contributors told us this also applied to careers using STEM skills.380
147.  However,  contributors  told  us  that  more  is  needed  from  current  careers  advice provision to ensure the public can find out what sorts of ‘green job’ are out there, and how to go about getting one.381 Venetia Knight, of Groundwork, said:
Sometimes people do not understand the green economy, and I do not think that there is very good careers advice generally about the kind of jobs and opportunities that are there. If you talk to careers advisers, they do not really 
375  Q137; Dr Joanie Willett (Senior Lecturer in Politics at University of Exeter) (GRJ0004); Enginuity (GRJ0009); 
Education and Training Foundation (GRJ0014); Local Government Association (GRJ0016); Lord John Bird (Founder, Chair and Editor-in-Chief at The Big Issue) (GRJ0030); BSW Timber Group (GRJ0036); EngineeringUK (GRJ0038)
376  Q105377  Q50; Dr Joanie Willett (Senior Lecturer in Politics at University of Exeter) (GRJ0004); Local Government 
Association (GRJ0016); EngineeringUK (GRJ0038)
378  Q58; Q136379  Q58; Q124380  Q158; EngineeringUK (GRJ0038)381  Dr Joanie Willett (Senior Lecturer in Politics at University of Exeter) (GRJ0004); Education and Training 
Foundation (GRJ0014); Groundwork UK (GRJ0015); Local Government Association (GRJ0016); Environmental Services Association (GRJ0052); SUEZ Recycling and Recovery UK Ltd (GRJ0056)
[Page #59]
  Green Jobs 
55
get it, so there is a lot of work for us to do as organisations—and especially organisations  like  Groundwork  that  are  about  connecting  communities and business—on getting the message out there about what work is like, what career paths people can go down and what the opportunities are.382
Dr  Joanie  Willett,  of  the  University  of  Exeter,  identified  ‘a  big  communication  gap between people that have opportunities, and the people that need opportunities’,383 and Groundwork  UK  say  there  is  a  ‘need  to  upskill  work  coaches  and  other  professionals providing support to job seekers, or careers advice in education settings, to ensure that they understand the opportunities available in the green economy.’384
148. At  our  roundtable  discussion  with  young  people,  we  heard  anecdotal  evidence about the difficulties of finding and accessing green job opportunities and an absence of information on green jobs at school. We heard that green jobs were seen as less prestigious and  less  financially  rewarding  than  other  careers,  although  there  was  satisfaction  in making a positive difference to the environment for future generations. One participant told us older colleagues were dismissive of green careers and had tried to discourage the participant from pursuing one.
149. The Green Jobs Taskforce says ‘good green careers advice is crucial across all levels of education’:385
This is to ensure advice on what green jobs are available to individuals, as well as the training and education pathways into them, is clear, accessible and resonates across different audiences. This is equally applicable to those in work or out of work, and for those considering changing jobs.386
The  Green  Jobs  Taskforce  has  called  for  the  Government  to  provide  green  skills  and careers advice through a ‘Green Careers Launchpad’ to coincide with the UK’s COP26 Presidency, accompanied by a green careers marketing campaign, and to promote green skills and employment opportunities through Jobcentre Plus.387
150. The  Government  recognises  the  importance  of  ‘impartial,  lifelong  careers  advice and guidance available to people when they need it, regardless of age, circumstance, or background’  within  its  Skills  for  Jobs  White  Paper,  describing  careers  information  as ‘fundamental to the success’ of the reforms.388 The Government’s online National Careers Service  provides  details  of  more  than  60  careers  on  its  ‘Environment  and  Land’  page, many of which could be considered green jobs.389 Minister Keegan told us ‘there has been a lot of work recently on careers and careers education’.390 The Minister recognised the role careers advice could play in increasing diversity and inclusion in green jobs,391 and told  us  that  the  Government  had  invested  in  careers  hubs  in  schools,  where  students could engage directly with local employers.392 Minister Davies told us that Jobcentre Plus 
382  Q127383  Dr Joanie Willett (Senior Lecturer in Politics at University of Exeter) (GRJ0004)384  Groundwork UK (GRJ0015)385  GOV.UK, Green Jobs Taskforce Report to Government, Industry and the Skills Sector (July 2021), p. 57386 387 388  GOV.UK, Skills for Jobs: Lifelong Learning for Opportunity and Growth (January 2021), p. 44389  GOV.UK, National Careers Service, Environment and Land, accessed 11 October 2021390  Q173391  Q205392  Q197
Ibid., p. 57Ibid., p. 58
[Page #60]
56
  Green Jobs 
and new youth hubs for under-25s could ‘give people the confidence and the skills for a changing labour market’.393 Minister Keegan told us it was the Government’s job to make it easier for people to see clear routes to green jobs.394
151.  However, what is missing currently is a plan for exactly that; how careers advice will be used to achieve the Government’s green jobs ambitions and to address the knowledge gap of green jobs in the public. Minister Keegan acknowledged to us that careers advice on green jobs ‘probably needs beefing up’, adding:
We  are  very  much  at  the  beginning  of  that  journey  so  people  can  link [education about the environment] to jobs, choices and subjects.395
The Government’s current Careers Strategy (2017) does not make any specific reference to careers in green sectors,396 and predates the 25 YEP (2018)397 and the passing of Net Zero legislation (2019),398 two policies expected to drive significant changes across the economy and accelerate the growth of UK green jobs. When we asked how the Careers Strategy was being adapted to align with the Government’s net zero goals, Minister Keegan responded that the Careers Strategy provided the ‘building blocks’, such as careers hubs in schools.399
152. While the careers advice infrastructure provided by careers hubs, Jobcentre Plus and youth hubs could provide a valuable avenue for green careers advice, the all-encompassing impact  of  the  Government’s  flagship  environmental  policies,  net  zero  and  the  25  YEP, alongside  its  ambitions  for  stimulating  growth  in  green  jobs  over  the  2020s,  requires strategic consideration of how careers advice will be leveraged to connect those seeking a green job with the opportunities that are being created. Without this, there is a risk that careers advice provision fails to align with the Government’s green job ambitions.
153. Careers  advice  will  play  an  important  role  in  making  people  aware  of  green  job opportunities and the skills and training they will need to access these, so it is important that  the  Government’s  Careers  Strategy  is  updated  to  align  with  the  Government’s wider environmental, net zero and green jobs ambitions. Given the different population groups who will be interested in finding out about green jobs, from different societal and occupational backgrounds and at different stages in their careers, it is important that the Government identify these different populations as part of this strategy update, and plan how to reach these groups. There are valuable opportunities here for the Government’s Careers Strategy to act as a catalyst for the Government’s other green jobs ambitions, such as ensuring diversity and inclusion and a just transition.
154. There  is  a  gap  in  the  public’s  awareness  of  green  job  opportunities  and  how  to access them. It is welcome that the Government acknowledges the importance of green careers advice, however the Government’s latest Careers Strategy (2017) pre-dates both its net zero (2019) and 25 Year Environment Plan (2018) ambitions, and needs to be updated so that careers advice can play its role in delivering these.
393  Q190394  Q220395  Q217396  GOV.UK, Careers strategy: making the most of everyone’s skills and talents (December 2017)397  GOV.UK, A Green Future: Our 25 Year Plan to Improve the Environment (January 2018)398  GOV.UK, UK becomes first major economy to pass net zero emissions law, accessed 11 October 2021399  Q220
[Page #61]
  Green Jobs 
57
155. By the end of 2021, the Government should set out how it will adapt its Careers Strategy to align with its net zero and environmental goals, including how it will reach different groups of the population to increase awareness of green job opportunities and how to access them, such as through its careers and youth hubs and Jobcentre Plus.
Case study: Gaining employability skills through nature jobs
RSPB estimates that current commitments alone could generate 127,485 nature jobs across the UK.400 Contributors told us that nature jobs can provide employment and training in rural and coastal areas, helping towards the Government’s levelling up ambitions, and address inequalities in access to nature, including through projects in urban green spaces.401
Groundwork told us green jobs in nature provided opportunities for ‘new entrants to the labour market with few skills or experience’ to gain practical skills and qualifications, citing Groundwork’s Green Teams programme, where young people experiencing unemployment work towards a Level 1 qualification in horticulture or land management while improving their local environment.402
Venetia Knight, of Groundwork, explained how nature jobs could provide wider transferable skills:
If you are working outside, things do not go to plan. You have to be quite flexible. You have to problem solve and work out how to deal with it. There are  also  plenty  of  team  work  opportunities—communication  between different people is absolutely critical for effectiveness—and opportunities to  develop  leadership  skills.  There  is  also  a  critical  thing  about  working outside in all weathers, you have to be quite hardy and resilient and just get  on  with  it.  Those  are  all  good  things  that  employers  value,  so  they are great skills that you can continue with within the natural environment sector, but they are very relevant to other employers across the board.403
400  RSPB (GRJ0028)401  Groundwork UK (GRJ0015), RSPB (GRJ0028), BSW Timber Group (GRJ0036)402  Groundwork UK (GRJ0015)403  Q135
[Page #62]
58
  Green Jobs 
Annex: Roundtable event
We held a roundtable event with a small number of young people in May 2021. While not designed to be representative of the views of any larger population, the event enabled us to speak directly with a small number of students and apprentices, to hear anecdotal evidence and their perspectives on green jobs. Anonymised quotes from participants at the event have been included below, for illustrative purposes.
On what the term ‘green jobs’ means to the participants:
A green job to me means doing something for the environment.
A green job for me is working in an industry that makes a difference, that makes a good change to the surroundings.
For me, ‘green jobs’ means low carbon transition, but that’s because I’m focused on the renewable energy industry.
For me, a green job is anything that is related to the wellbeing of the environment; that ranges from contributing to reducing the impact of climate change, to lower carbon emissions, to the reduction of toxic chemicals used in our everyday life.
If it’s in the reusing or recycling economy, I feel that’s a green job.
When  you  look  at  work  done  on  green  spaces,  it  has  a  positive  effect  on  people’s wellbeing, and you have doctors playing their role in the sustainability of the world, so [a green job is one in which] you provide a situation where the future generations can benefit from the resources just as much as we are doing now.
Moving forward there will be no separation between green jobs and jobs, because if you want something green, it will be embedded in every facet. So, there are financial organisations that are funding projects but doing it sustainably. When you’re looking in the future, there will be jobs, but they’ll have the green aspect embedded.
On the attractiveness of green jobs in comparison with other sectors:
From my experience, when you look at the pay compared to other jobs, in finance for example, I’m at a disadvantage. Even though I’m doing something to sustain the world’s growth, I’m not getting much in return in terms of money, so that’s a pay-off you have to deal with.
I feel like there’s not as much respect towards green jobs at the moment and right now we can’t pick and choose. Any job is a job, and going forward we want these jobs to have more prestige, [be] more aspirational, because it makes a big difference compared to other jobs.
For me green jobs are prestigious and [it] makes me feel content doing something for the environment and future generations. I feel like I’m leaving an earth that is sustainable and liveable for the next generation, for my babies and grandchildren and that’s a good feeling for me. In terms of financial return, it’s not as good as other corporate jobs, but it gives you immense satisfaction, which matters at the end of the day.
[Page #63]
  Green Jobs 
59
Financially it’s not as well respected. Being young, you’ve got a house to save for, you want to go out with friends; it’s expensive. And that financial respect bit is in our older colleagues too. They aren’t as bothered about the environment; they’ve had their jobs for years and they don’t respect [you] as much when you talk about the environment. People say, “oh, that’s not a good career, you want to get into engineering, fixing cars, something like that.”
On how easy it is to find out about green job opportunities:
Finding one as an apprentice is hard because apprenticeships are hard to get. The one I got, there were 300 applicants for ten jobs. So, to aim for a green job makes it even harder to find something.
I always knew I wanted to get into aviation. But on how easy it was to find a green job, I found it impossible. I feel like apprenticeships are one of the best things that’s happened to me, because you pick up a fresh mind that’s full of ideas and put that seed in your company and that’s what green jobs need.
For me, as part of my course we get resources linking to sites advertising green jobs. The problem is, I read an [Institute of Environmental Management & Assessment] report that said about 3.1% of people in environmental industries are from an ethnic minority or black, so when you look at things like that, it’s not encouraging as an ethnic minority; you’re not getting into the jobs.
On how well education had prepared participants for finding and securing a green job:
Coming from an academic background, you’re given a broad spectrum, so as a fresher going into the jobs market you don’t have a role in mind and are encouraged to apply for a wide range of jobs and it can be mind boggling. From an academic background, it’s daunting trying to get that first role.
There wasn’t much for us at school about green jobs or the future of jobs and that was six years ago for me, which isn’t long.
I’ve  always  been  interested  in  the  environment,  but  when  it  came  to  my  friends  at school, no one was interested, even [for] those [who] did biology, it was something to tick off and have on your CV. And a lot of my friends still aren’t; if I start talking about it, they’re not interested at all. And in the classroom, we had climate change awareness week, but everyone just saw it as a way to get off something else, and no one listened. I think [we need to] make people in schools aware of how devastating it will be and it will affect them.
I’ve studied across lots of different countries, and you don’t get sustainability embedded across the curriculum. Even now at university it feels like it’s taken as a different subject. If we think of green jobs as something encompassing jobs beyond the direct impact on the environment, it’s not assimilated across the curriculum at any stage and you need to have that interest to pursue it as a subject on its own.
When I was in school, I wrote about climate change, but we didn’t realise the magnitude of climate change. The curriculum doesn’t focus on the immensity of climate change and its harm.
[Page #64]
60
  Green Jobs 
I think it should be added to the curriculum: not just climate change, but jobs behind it and examples of people that have made a difference. My sister is in primary school and she had a green day at her school; the next day, my mum wanted to drive her but she wouldn’t let her and told her, “you’re not allowed, it’s bad for the climate.” So, starting young will make a huge difference and make it the norm.
On how easy it was for a young people to get a green job:
I’m not very optimistic about it because that 3.1% statistic isn’t encouraging. We are also disproportionately affected by climate change, because minorities tend to live in places with bad pollution and bad transport, so you need people like us with a personal perspective to help solve these issues.
It’s not a smooth journey for a young professional to get a green job. I tried to apply in the UK for all the internships, but haven’t got one so far.
I’m in a workplace already, but I want to help my company become more green and more sustainable and show how they can do that better.
On how to increase diversity and inclusion in green sectors:
One  of  the  most  important  things  is  apprenticeships.  They’re  available  to  everybody and you don’t need to have a degree behind you to apply for one, so you aren’t limited.
If  there  are  small  scale  projects,  people  from  different  backgrounds  but  without experience  can  assist  with  these.  Big  companies  should  have  these  small  projects  so we can join and share our ideas. That would be a great opportunity for international students.
If you’re trying to bring it to the broader public, you want to start from the grass roots. If you want to include minorities, they might benefit from apprenticeships because they don’t have the finances for universities. In discussions with my black friends, they are entrepreneurs who have seen gaps in the market and come up with ideas and solutions themselves. One of these is BPIC or Black People in Construction network, a network helping  to  make  construction  more  inclusive  and  maybe  Government  can  look  to those sorts of entrepreneurial efforts and encourage them with finances and encourage companies to work with them. You allow people to come in and share their solutions rather than stifling them.
If you’re coming from an ethnic minority, you’re not looking at the environment as one of the first places to work because you have your family behind you and you’re thinking “how can I make money?”.
It comes back to school for me. If green jobs got pushed from a younger age and we knew that a green job is a very viable option for the future, that would [have helped to] push me down that green job avenue from a younger age.
[Page #65]
  Green Jobs 
61
Conclusions and recommendations
Green jobs ambitions
1.  There is no single definition, nor single way to measure green jobs. The Government’s ambitions for accelerating the number of green jobs over the 2020s are welcome, but without a clear definition and metric, the Government will be unable to assess whether its policies are leading to good quality, green jobs in the sectors and regions they are needed. (Paragraph 19)
2.  We recommend that, by the end of 2021, the Government set out how it will measure progress towards its green jobs targets; this should include its definition of ‘green jobs’, and how it will measure the number, type and location of these over the 2020s, for the purpose of monitoring and evaluating the impact of its policies. (Paragraph 20)
3. 
‘Green jobs’ is a cross-cutting issue, requiring action across Government alongside co-ordination  with  local  authorities  and  the  devolved  administrations  to  deliver the Government’s ambitions. Clear lines of responsibility and a mechanism for co-ordination are needed, otherwise green jobs risks being given insufficient priority within  departments,  constraining  the  Government’s  efforts  to  develop  the  green jobs and skills needed in the economy. (Paragraph 26)
4.  We  recommend  that  the  Government,  in  its  response  to  this  report,  set  out  its arrangements  for  cross-departmental  delivery  of  green  jobs  and  skills  ambitions, identifying: 
a) 
each department’s responsibilities;
b)  how it will monitor and co-ordinate delivery across departments; and
c)  how it will collaborate with the devolved administrations and local authorities.
We recommend that these arrangements include tasking the cabinet committees on climate  action  with  overseeing  the  delivery  of  green  jobs  and  skills  actions  across Government, ensuring that this includes oversight of departments’ actions on green jobs and skills less directly related to climate action, such as those in nature or the circular economy. (Paragraph 27)
5.  Departments need to understand the delivery costs for their green jobs responsibilities to ensure their spending plans include sufficient allocation for this. Any analysis of environmental  skills  needs  in  local  government  needs  to  be  accompanied  by  an assessment of the funding requirements for the green jobs and skills that are needed within  local  authorities  to  deliver  local  government’s  responsibilities  towards  the Government’s climate and nature objectives. (Paragraph 35)
6.  We recommend that by the end of 2021 the department or body with overall responsibility for  delivery  of  the  Government’s  green  jobs  policies  should,  in  collaboration  with the different departments engaged in green jobs policy, assign indicative costings to each  department’s  actions  within  the  overall  green  jobs  delivery  plan.  This  should include the Government’s assessment of the funding requirements for green jobs and skills needed within local authorities to deliver the Government’s climate and nature objectives. (Paragraph 36)
[Page #66]
62
  Green Jobs 
Jobs and skills needed for a green covid-19 recovery
7. 
Just 1 per cent of Kickstart scheme jobs were in green sectors. While we understand the need to support current industries, we consider that an opportunity has been missed  for  a  greener  employment  recovery  scheme,  to  contribute  towards  the Government’s ‘building back greener’ aims. (Paragraph 43)
8.  We  recommend  that  the  Government’s  net  zero  and  environmental  goals  are considered at the design stage of future labour market interventions, to ensure that such interventions are fully aligned with the green recovery. (Paragraph 44)
9.  We first recommended that the Government pilot a National Nature Service in our report ‘Growing back better: putting nature and net zero at the heart of the economic recovery’. The Government’s response did not engage directly with this proposal. A National Nature Service would build valuable capacity in the nature sector while providing people with wider employment skills, helping to deliver a green recovery. An established national scheme, rather than one-off funding, would help capacity in the longer term and could have wider reach. (Paragraph 54)
10.  We reiterate the recommendation from our earlier report that the Government should work with conservation organisations to pilot a National Nature Service during 2022. (Paragraph 55)
11.  The voucher element of the Green Homes Grant scheme, the Government’s recent flagship  scheme  to  address  covid-19  impact  while  stimulating  jobs  in  the  green sector of home retrofit for energy efficiency, was not a success, and may even have put people out of work; there is a need to rebuild trust with the retrofit sector. Lack of engagement with the industry over the design of the scheme led to it being sub-optimal, resulting in a fragmented and actively disruptive approach to developing skills in a vital sector. The Government has acknowledged that the voucher scheme has not operated as intended in this respect. (Paragraph 64)
12.  We  recommend  that  the  Government’s  own  analysis  into  the  Green  Homes  Grant voucher  scheme  be  completed  during  2021  to  ensure  lessons  learned  inform  future schemes’  designs,  and  include  a  plan  for  industry  engagement,  to  rebuild  trust. (Paragraph 65)
13.  The  scale  of  the  challenge  to  retrofit  homes  is  significant,  as  recognised  by  the Government when launching the Green Homes Grant scheme, claiming it would create 100,000 green jobs. With millions of homes requiring retrofitting to achieve decarbonisation through improved insulation alongside electrification by heat pump installation, or, in due course, potentially hydrogen insertion into the gas grid, the industry requires substantial upskilling and an increase in the trained workforce across the UK. (Paragraph 66)
14. 
In  line  with  our  recommendation  for  a  national  retrofit  strategy  in  our  Energy Efficiency in Existing Homes report, by the end of 2021 the Government needs to set out a programme to encourage the development of relevant skills across the construction trade,  including  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises,  to  stimulate  development  of skilled trades to increase the capacity markedly. (Paragraph 67)
[Page #67]
  Green Jobs 
63
Long-term environmental goals and a just transition to net zero
15.  We have heard concerns that skills shortages will affect delivery of the Government’s long-term environmental goals, as set out in the 25 Year Environment Plan. It is welcome that Defra are currently working on a Skills Gap Plan to identify where there  are  skills  shortages  and  collaborating  with  other  departments  on  this. (Paragraph 72)
16.  We recommend that Defra’s Skills Gap Plan cover all areas of the 25 Year Environment Plan and be accompanied by an Action Plan to address skills shortages, developed in co-ordination with the Department for Education and stakeholders. The Skills Gap Plan and Action Plan ought to be published by March 2022 at the latest and aligned with Defra’s existing and forthcoming sectoral plans and strategies, such as the Waste and Resources, Clean Air, Trees, Peat and Nature strategies. (Paragraph 73)
17.  We welcome the Government’s commitment to ensuring regions are not left behind in the transition. To ensure this is delivered, it is vital that the Government carry out some planning for a just transition and how the Government intends to support it. This must include plans for public engagement to maintain public support for net zero, provision for wider support such as pensions and employability support, and ensuring local skills provision and (re-)training opportunities. (Paragraph 81)
18.  As action to deliver a just transition will require collaboration across Government and  co-ordination  with  local  government  and  the  devolved  administrations,  the plan  also  needs  to  set  out  departmental  responsibilities,  and  monitoring  and  co-ordinating  arrangements.  This  plan  might  be  included  alongside  the  document setting out departmental responsibilities and funding, recommended in Chapter 1. The Government’s plan for a just transition should also consider replacement jobs in  green  sectors  less  directly  related  to  net  zero,  such  as  nature  and  the  circular economy. (Paragraph 82)
19. 
Some regions will be particularly affected by the transition. While the Government cannot actively manage the whole transition, it is important to assess where impacts will fall to ensure there are policies for support and replacement green jobs in place, in line with the Government’s levelling up ambitions. (Paragraph 83)
20.  We recommend that a just transition plan:
a)  be published by the end of 2021;
b)  assess regional as well as sectoral impact, to ensure regional skills transitioning 
plus employment and pensions support is in place; and
c) 
include a strategy for maintaining public support for net zero.
As  cross-departmental  action  is  required,  this  plan  should  set  out  the  departments or bodies co-ordinating just transition action and each department’s responsibilities, alongside plans for monitoring progress and co-ordinating with local authorities and the devolved administrations. The just transition plan should also include plans for stimulating replacement jobs in green sectors less directly related to net zero, such as nature and the circular economy. (Paragraph 84)
[Page #68]
64
  Green Jobs 
21.  There  is  a  risk  that  the  net zero transition could  lead to  UK  job and  skills losses if carbon-emitting industries simply move overseas. A carbon border adjustment mechanism  (CBAM),  recommended  in  our  report  ‘Growing  back  better:  putting nature and net zero at the heart of the economic recovery’, should be considered as part of measures to address this. (Paragraph 90)
22.  The Government needs to set out in its just transition plan how it will address this risk. During 2021, the Government should conduct analysis into how a UK CBAM could comply with international trade obligations. (Paragraph 91)
Education and skills pipeline
23. 
In school, education on climate change and environmental sustainability is limited to  a  few  subjects.  It  is  important  that  it  is  included  across  all  courses  to  give  all students a basic grounding in environmental issues and to show how their subjects can be useful in tacking environmental challenges, whatever sector they go on to work  in.  This  will  ensure  the  future  UK  workforce  is  climate  and  sustainability literate. A greater awareness of environment and sustainability across the population could  lead  to  increased  diversity  of  people  entering  green  sectors,  contributing to the Government’s ambitions for a more diverse and inclusive green workforce. (Paragraph 101)
24.  We  recommend  that  environmental  sustainability  be  included  across  all  primary and  secondary  courses  delivered  through  the  National  Curriculum  and  across  A Level  courses.  Teachers  should  be  supported  to  deliver  this,  with  teacher  training and continuous professional development. We recommend that the Department for Education consult all relevant stakeholders during the 2021/22 academic year on the delivery of this recommendation. (Paragraph 102)
25.  Our  previous  report  on  biodiversity  in  the  UK  identified  that  education  could provide a crucial lever to address inequalities in access to nature. The Government’s Children and Nature Programme went some way in increasing access opportunities for  schoolchildren,  however  the  programme  is  due  to  end  in  March  2022.  We consider  this  misses  an  opportunity  to  build  on  the  successes  of  the  programme through expanding the programme, to further widen access to nature in education and contribute to building a future green skills pipeline by attracting more young people into green careers. (Paragraph 103)
26.  By the end of January 2022, the Government should engage with delivery partners and schools in order to extend the Children and Nature programme beyond March 2022 and expand the number of delivery projects within the programme, using the evaluation project findings to inform the design and implementation of this expansion. (Paragraph 104)
27.  Apprenticeships are a fast way to bring new skills into a workplace, but climate and environmental sustainability issues are not embedded across them. If they were, this would allow apprentices to apply this knowledge directly to their jobs, addressing employer green skills gaps. This should be extended to the new T Level courses too. (Paragraph 112)
[Page #69]
  Green Jobs 
65
28.  We recommend that a module on environmental sustainability be included in every apprenticeship and T Level course. The Government should consult with stakeholders during the 2021/22 academic year on how to implement this. (Paragraph 113)
29.  Extending  the  equivalent  or  lower  funding  rule  exemption  to  full-time  science, technology,  engineering  and  mathematics  (STEM)  and  geographical  and environmental courses would allow quicker retraining in higher level skills needed in the future green economy. (Paragraph 121)
30.  We  recommend  that  the  Government  extend  the  equivalent  or  lower  funding  rule exemption  to  full-time  STEM  and  geographical  and  environmental  courses  from 2022/23. (Paragraph 122)
31.  Without closely monitoring current and future skills needs and shortages across the net zero transition, there is a risk that today’s courses and training are not addressing the  demands  of  the  future.  This  monitoring  needs  to  be  ongoing,  to  respond  to changes  in  the  economy  over  the  course  of  the  transition.  We  are  particularly concerned  that,  without  such  monitoring  and  planning,  the  future  demand  for technical and practical green skills might exceed the available training provision in further education. (Paragraph 131)
32.  We recommend that by the end of 2021, the Skills and Productivity Board, or similar body, is tasked with ongoing monitoring of skills needs, with regular periodic reviews, to ensure forward-looking and responsive skills planning which encompasses the needs of the economy in reaching the Government’s net zero and long-term environmental ambitions. (Paragraph 132)
Diversity, inclusion and access to green jobs
33.  To be able to monitor whether its ambitions to increase diversity and inclusion in the green workforce are being achieved, the Government needs to articulate these ambitions  in  a  measurable  way  and  have  a  metric  for  measuring  diversity  and inclusion in the green workforce. (Paragraph 139)
34.  By the end of 2021, the Government should set out its ambitions for improving diversity and inclusion in the green workforce and set out how it will measure diversity and inclusion in green jobs, for the purpose of monitoring and evaluating progress towards its aims. (Paragraph 140)
35. 
Something  that  has  not  been  considered  in  the  Green  Jobs  Taskforce  report recommendations  is  the  wider  enabling  infrastructure  which  allows  people  to physically access green job opportunities, such as public transport, care and rural broadband  connectivity.  This  will  involve  co-ordination  across  the  Government. This  wider  infrastructure  needs  to  be  factored  into  the  Government’s  green  jobs and just transition delivery plans from the outset; if people are unable to physically access  green  job  opportunities,  this  could  undermine  not  just  the  Government’s ambitions for the number of people seeking and successfully entering green jobs, but also its ambitions for a just transition and diversity and inclusion in the green workforce. (Paragraph 144)
[Page #70]
66
  Green Jobs 
36.  The  Government’s  green  jobs  and  just  transition  delivery  plans  should  include analysis  of  the  enabling  infrastructure  needed  for  people  to  access  new  green  jobs, and allocate actions to the departments with responsibilities over this infrastructure. (Paragraph 145)
37.  There  is  a  gap  in  the  public’s  awareness  of  green  job  opportunities  and  how  to access  them.  It  is  welcome  that  the  Government  acknowledges  the  importance of  green  careers  advice,  however  the  Government’s  latest  Careers  Strategy  (2017) pre-dates both its net zero (2019) and 25 Year Environment Plan (2018) ambitions, and needs to be updated so that careers advice can play its role in delivering these. (Paragraph 154)
38.  By  the  end  of  2021,  the  Government  should  set  out  how  it  will  adapt  its  Careers Strategy to align with its net zero and environmental goals, including how it will reach different groups of the population to increase awareness of green job opportunities and how to access them, such as through its careers and youth hubs and Jobcentre Plus. (Paragraph 155)
[Page #71]
  Green Jobs 
67
Formal minutes
Thursday 21 October 2021
Members present
Philip Dunne, in the Chair
Mr Robert Goodwill
Helen Hayes
Caroline Lucas
Cherilyn Mackrory
Green jobs and the just transition
The Committee deliberated.
Draft Report (Green jobs), proposed by the Chair, brought up and read.
Paragraphs 1 to 155 read and agreed to.
Annex and Summary agreed to.
Resolved, That the Report be the Third Report of the Committee to the House.
Ordered, That the Chair make the Report to the House.
Ordered, That embargoed copies of the Report be made available, in accordance with the provisions of Standing Order No. 134.
Adjournment
Adjourned till Wednesday 27 October at 2.00 pm.
[Page #72]
68
  Green Jobs 
Witnesses
The following witnesses gave evidence. Transcripts can be viewed on the inquiry publications page of the Committee’s website.
Wednesday 03 February 2021
Libby Peake, Head of Resource Policy, Green Alliance; Luke Murphy, Associate Director  for  Energy,  Climate,  Housing  and  Infrastructure,  Institute  for  Public Policy Research; Mike Hemsley, Team Leader, Carbon Budgets, Climate Change Committee 
Q1–37
Sue Ferns, Deputy General Secretary, Trades Union Congress (TUC); Professor Josie Fraser, Deputy Vice Chancellor, Open University, Skills & Education Panel member, Institution of Engineering and Technology; Mr Martin Baxter, Director of  Policy  and  External  Affairs  and  Deputy  CEO,  Institute  of  Environmental Management and Assessment 
Q38–66
Wednesday 03 March 2021
Ms Charlotte Bonner, National Head of Education for Sustainable Development (ESD), Education and Training Foundation (ETF); Mr Iain Patton, Chief Executive Officer,  EAUC  -  The  Alliance  for  Sustainability  Leadership  in  Education;  Meg Baker, Director of Education,  Students  Organising for  Sustainability UK  (SOS-UK);  Graham  Petersen,  Secretary,  Greener  Jobs  Alliance;  Lee  Jowett,  Fellow, National  Association  for  Environmental  Education,  Sustainable  Schools Coordinator, Leicester City Council 
Q67–84
Samantha  Smith,  Director,  Just  Transition  Centre;  Kevin  Bentley,  Chair,  Local Government  Association’s  People  &  Places  Board,  Conservative  Councillor, Stanway & Pyefleet Division, Colchester, Essex County Council; Richard Kendall, Executive Director, Humber Local Enterprise Partnership 
Q85–112
Wednesday 12 May 2021
Jane  Cooper,  UK  Stakeholder  Relations  &  Regulatory  Affairs,  Orsted;  Dr Adam  Read,  External  Affairs  Director,  SUEZ  Recycling  and  Recovery  UK  Ltd; Venetia Knight, Head of Employment and Enterprise at Groundwork Greater Manchester, Groundwork 
Q113–137
Andrew Mennear, Director, UK Government Affairs, BP; Peter Walters, Head of Environment and Sustainability, Chemical Industries Association 
Q138–169
[Page #73]
  Green Jobs 
69
Wednesday 09 June 2021
Rt Hon Anne-Marie Trevelyan MP, Minister of State (Minister for Business, Energy and Clean Growth), Department of Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, UK International  Champion  on  Adaptation  and  Resilience,  COP26;  Amy  Jenkins, Deputy  Director,  Clean  Growth,  Green  Finance  and  Sustainable  behaviours for Net Zero, Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy; Gillian Keegan MP, Parliamentary Under Secretary of State (Minister for Apprenticeships and  Skills),  Department  for  Education;  Sinead  O’Sullivan,  Director,  Career Learning,  Analysis  and  Skills  Directorate,  Department  for  Education;  Rebecca Pow MP, Parliamentary Under Secretary of State, Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs; Jon Boswell, Head of Strategic Funding, Green Finance Division, Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs; Mims Davies MP, Parliamentary Under Secretary of State (Minister for Employment), Department for Work and Pensions; Jessica Hodgson, Deputy Director for Labour Market Strategy, Department for Work and Pensions 
Q170–220
[Page #74]
70
  Green Jobs 
Published written evidence
The following written evidence was received and can be viewed on the inquiry publications page of the Committee’s website.
GRJ numbers are generated by the evidence processing system and so may not be complete.
1 
Aldersgate Group (GRJ0050)
2 
Association of Colleges (GRJ0067)
3 
BBIA (GRJ0047)
4 
BSW Timber Group (GRJ0036)
5 
Biomass UK (GRJ0013)
6 
Bird, Lord John (Founder, Chair and Editor-in-Chief, The Big Issue) (GRJ0030)
7 
Cadent Gas (GRJ0008)
8 
Centrica (GRJ0070)
9 
Chartered Institution of Wastes Management; WAMITAB; and UK Resources Council; and SUEZ Recycling and Recovery UK Ltd (GRJ0062)
10 
Chemical Industries Association (GRJ0041)
11 
Clarke, Professor Linda (Professor, Centre for the Study of the Production of the Built Environment (ProBE), Westminster Business School, University of Westminster); Sahin-Dikmen, Dr Melahat (Research Fellow, University of Westminster); Winch, Prof Christopher (Professor of Educational Philosophy and Policy, Kings College London); and Duran Palma, Dr Fernando (Senior Lecturer, Westminster Business School, University of Westminster) (GRJ0053)
12 
Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (GRJ0063)
13 
Drax Group (GRJ0024)
14 
E.ON (GRJ0019)
15 
EAUC - The Alliance for Sustainability Leadership in Education (GRJ0029)
16 
EDF (GRJ0048)
17 
EDF Energy (GRJ0069)
18 
EEESafe (GRJ0068)
19 
Education and Training Foundation (GRJ0014)
20 
Electricity North West (GRJ0054)
21 
Energy Efficiency Association CIC (GRJ0006)
22 
Energy Systems Catapult (GRJ0055)
23 
Engineering Construction Industry Training Board (ECITB) (GRJ0039)
24 
EngineeringUK (GRJ0038)
25 
Enginuity (GRJ0009)
26 
Environmental Services Association (GRJ0052)
27 
Green Alliance (GRJ0064)
28 
Green New Deal UK (GRJ0058)
29  Greener Jobs Alliance (GRJ0060)
[Page #75]
  Green Jobs 
71
30  Greenpeace UK (GRJ0027)
31 
Greig, Dr Alison (Director of Education for Sustainability, Ruskin, Anglia University); and Strachen, Ms Sarah (Research Assistant, Anglia Ruskin University) (GRJ0032)
32 
Groundwork UK (GRJ0015)
33 
Hubbub Foundation (GRJ0002)
34 
IEMA - Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment (GRJ0025)
35 
Imperial College London (GRJ0045)
36 
Institute for Public Policy Research (GRJ0059)
37 
Institution of Engineering and Technology (GRJ0031)
38 
Investment Association (GRJ0040)
39 
Local Government Association (GRJ0016)
40  Mineral Wool Insulation Manufacturers Association (MIMA) (GRJ0026)
41  Moyo, Miss Nicolle (Student, University of East Anglia) (GRJ0010)
42  National Express West Midlands (GRJ0007)
43 
National Union of Rail, Maritime & Transport Workers (RMT) (GRJ0012)
44  National Grid (GRJ0043)
45 
New Anglia LEP (GRJ0037)
46  NNB Generation Company (SZC) Ltd; Laing O’Rourke; Doosan Babcock; EDF Energy; EDF Energy; NNB Generation Company (SZC) Ltd; and Agilia Infrastructure Partners (GRJ0061)
47  OGUK (GRJ0033)
48 
Petersen, Graham (Secretary, Greener Jobs Alliance) (GRJ0066)
49 
Platform (GRJ0051)
50 
Public and Commercial Services (PCS) trade union (GRJ0044)
51 
Reay, Professor Dave (Chair in Carbon Management & Education, School of Geosciences, University of Edinburgh); and Petersen, Katrine (Campaign Manager - Narratives, Grantham Institute - Climate Change and Environment at Imperial College London) (GRJ0023)
52 
RSPB (GRJ0028)
53 
Rolls-Royce plc (GRJ0018)
54 
Royal Institute of British Architects (GRJ0021)
55 
Royal Society of Chemistry (GRJ0034)
56 
SUEZ Recycling and Recovery UK Ltd (GRJ0056)
57 
Solar Trade Association (GRJ0035)
58 
Strawbale Building UK (GRJ0049)
59 
Sustrans (GRJ0011)
60 
Transition Economics (GRJ0022)
61 
UK Energy Research Centre (GRJ0042)
62  UK National Association for Environmental Education; UK National Association for 
Environmental Education; and UK National Association for Environmental Education (GRJ0065)
[Page #76]
72
  Green Jobs 
63  UK Women’s Budget Group (GRJ0003)
64 
Veolia (GRJ0046)
65  Willett, Dr Joanie (Senior Lecturer in Politics, University of Exeter) (GRJ0004)
66 
Yau, Mr Nigel (Research Assistant, Smith School of Enterprise and the Environment, University of Oxford); Hristov, Deiana (Research Assistant, Smith School of Enterprise and the Environment, University of Oxford); O’Callaghan, Mr Brian (Lead of Oxford University Economic Recovery Project, Smith School of Enterprise and the Environment, University of Oxford); Innocenti, Dr Stefania (Research Associate in Behaviour, Finance and Social Statistics, Smith School of Enterprise and the Environment, University of Oxford); and Hepburn, Professor Cameron (Director, Smith School of Enterprise and the Environment, University of Oxford) (GRJ0057)
[Page #77]
  Green Jobs 
73
List of Reports from the Committee during the current Parliament
All  publications  from  the  Committee  are  available  on  the  publications  page  of  the Committee’s website.
Session 2021–22
Number
Title
Reference
1st
Biodiversity in the UK: bloom or bust?
HC 136
2nd
The UK’s footprint on global biodiversity
HC 674
1st Special
Energy efficiency of existing homes: Government Response to the Committee’s Fourth Report of Session 2019–21
HC 135
2nd Special
Growing back better: putting nature and net zero at the heart of the economic recovery: Government and Bank of England Responses to the Committee’s Third Report of Session 2019–21
HC 327
3rd Special
Biodiversity in the UK: bloom or bust?: Government Response to the Committee’s First Report
HC 727
Session 2019–21
Number
Title
Reference
1st
Electronic Waste and the Circular Economy
HC 220
2nd
Pre-appointment hearing for the Chair-Designate of the Office for Environmental Protection (OEP)
HC 1042
3rd
Growing back better: putting nature and net zero at the heart of the economic recovery
HC 347
4th
Energy Efficiency of Existing Homes
HC 346
1st Special
Invasive species: Government response to the Committee’s First report of Session 2019
HC 332
2nd Special
Our Planet, Our Health: Government Response to the Twenty-First Report of Session 2017–19
HC 467
3rd Special
Electronic Waste and the Circular Economy: Government Response to the Committee’s First Report
HC 1268
