[Page #0]
J UNE  2022 UP DAT E
National Plan for  Industrial BiotechnologyRealising our net zero ambitions
[Page #1]
NATIONAL  PLAN F OR  IND U STR IAL  B IOT E C H N O LOGY 
REALI SING OUR NET ZERO AMBIT IONS
Contents
Ministerial Foreword
Our vision for Scotland is a strong economy with well-paid jobs and growing businesses, that maximises Scotland’s strengths and natural assets to increase prosperity, productivity and international competitiveness, and enables a just transition to net zero.
Ministerial foreword 
03
Introduction  
04
Scotland’s vision 
05
The National Strategy for Economic Transformation, launched earlier this year, sets 
out how we aim to deliver this plan over the next ten years. This includes identifying 
new market opportunities where Scotland has the potential to develop world-leading 
What is industrial biotechnology 
06
industries, building on our technological strengths. Industrial Biotechnology is 
highlighted as one of these key industries. Its innovative and sustainable methods 
of using biological processes to create the products we need, designates it a crucial 
Key achievements timeline 
08
sector for transitioning Scotland away from fossil fuel based manufacturing to 
greener alternatives. 
Policy 
10
Ms Kate Forbes, MSP 
It is therefore encouraging that the bold targets published in Scotland’s National 
Cabinet Secretary for Finance  
Plan for Industrial Biotechnology back in 2013 will be met ahead of schedule. We 
and the Economy
Industry Engagement 
12
could not have imagined ten years ago that we would exceed the target trajectory 
to the extent that the Industrial Biotechnology Innovation Centre (IBioIC) has set 
out new stretch targets in this final refresh of the Plan: of 220 active industrial 
Innovation 
14
biotechnology companies, £1.2bn turnover and over 4,000 direct employees by 
2025. 
Skills 
16
IBioIC’s work to support and develop the industry should be recognised as a 
significant factor in this growth. Since it was established in 2014, IBioIC has 
excelled at providing technical expertise and advice to companies, opportunities 
Sustainable manufacturing 
18
for networking and collaboration, and exceptional training and development 
programmes delivered in conjunction with its academic partners. 
Infrastructure 
20
We are proud that Scotland is becoming known internationally for its Industrial 
Biotechnology expertise, of its success to date, and that the sector is continuing 
to expand and attract investment. As we look not only to our own net zero target 
Success stories 
22
of 2045, but to the impact that the climate emergency is already having on 
communities across the globe, we must embrace the opportunity to be leaders 
Mr Ivan McKee, MSP 
in new markets and industries like industrial biotechnology to enable Scotland to 
Concluding remarks 
26
Minister for Business, Trade,  
transform its own economy, while providing a model of innovation and sustainability 
Tourism and Enterprise
to others. 
2
JUNE 2022 UPDATE 
3
[Page #2]
NATIONAL  PLAN F OR  IND U STR IAL  B IOT E C H N O LOGY 
REALI SING OUR NET ZERO AMBIT IONS
Introduction
Scotland’s vision
Industrial Biotechnology (IB) offers green and sustainable ways to reduce our dependence on fossil fuels, which underpin so many of the products we use as part of everyday life. IB provides a way to secure local supply chains, reduce our impact on the environment, achieve net zero by 2045, create green jobs, and fuel economic growth.
Scotland will be the go-to destination to incubate and grow bioeconomy businesses to scale and to manufacture products and services, desired by consumers and end-users, that will facilitate the nation’s net zero 2045 ambition.
In 2013, the National Plan for Industrial 
Scotland offers a world-class innovation 
industry-ready skills, and a supportive 
new stretch targets have been set.
As well as outlining the progress to date and future 
Biotechnology (National Plan) set 
policy and regulatory framework. 
ecosystem that will enable great 
ambitions, the updated National Plan sets out the priority 
Scotland has a vibrant and prosperous 
out a roadmap to transform the 
ideas to become investable business 
actions needed to accelerate growth of the prospering 
The original National Plan set targets 
bioeconomy and by 2025 has ambition 
competitiveness and sustainability 
propositions and marketable products 
of 200 active IB companies, £900m 
to further increase the number of 
of multiple sectors across Scotland, 
IB industry, centred around six themes:
through timely and targeted support 
turnover and over 2,500 direct 
companies active in IB to over 220, 
under the IB umbrella, ensuring we 
for start-ups, access to state of art 
employees by 2025. The industry has 
increasing associated turnover to 
can manufacture everything we 
technology and facilities, provision of 
already achieved great success and is 
£1.2bn, and creating an industry with 
need without relying on fossil fuels. 
local scale-up infrastructure, access to 
well ahead of schedule, therefore, 
over 4,000 employees.
Over the past decade, significant 
POLICY: Creating a policy environment that facilitates the adoption of IB.
progress has been made towards that 
transformation. However, with a climate 
State of play in 2013
Original targets  for 2025
State of play  in 2020 
New targets  for 2025
emergency upon us, there has never 
been a greater need for the nation to 
INDUSTRY ENGAGEMENT: Increasing awareness of biotechnology as a tool for transformation and sustainable growth.
transition to bio-based manufacturing, 
Companies actively 
200
147
220
43
and to do it swiftly.  
involved in IB
£900m
£797m
£1.2bn
£189m
Estimated turnover
Scotland's National Strategy for 
Economic Transformation (NSET) – 
>2,500
>3,000
>4,000
1,103
Direct employees
INNOVATION: Facilitating innovation in IB and enhancing its adoption across multiple industries. 
published in March 2022 – reiterates 
>£250m
>£235m
>£360m
£61m
GVA contribution
that need. The report outlines 
Scotland’s ambition to become a nation 
of entrepreneurs and innovators, 
SKILLS: Generating rewarding and high-quality careers in biotechnology and providing the skills to meet the changing needs of the growing workforce.
building resilient supply chains in new 
Updated National Plan targets
1400
500
industries, embracing technological 
450
change and scientific advances to 
1200
400
respond to the climate and nature 
1000
crisis. IB is specified as one of the 
se
350
i
napmocforebmuN
SUSTAINABLE MANUFACTURING: Greening supply chains and transitioning industries towards sustainable production.
key industries that will accelerate the 
)
m£(
300
800
economy towards net zero. 
revonruT
250
600
This refresh of the National Plan aligns 
200
with many key aspects of the NSET, in 
150
400
relation to innovation, skills, economic 
INFRASTRUCTURE: Making Scotland the go-to destination to incubate and grow bioeconomy businesses to scale.
New turnover target
100
growth and sustainable supply chains.
New companies target
200
50
Original turnover target
0
0
Original companies target
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
2023
2025
4
JUNE 2022 UPDATE 
5
[Page #3]
NATIONAL  PLAN F OR  IND U STR IAL  B IOT E C H N O LOGY 
REALI SING OUR NET ZERO AMBIT IONS
What is industrial biotechnology
Industrial Biotechnology uses plant-based and waste resources (biomass), and/or bio-based processes to create chemicals, materials, consumer products, novel foods and feed and medicines. It offers green and sustainable alternatives to fossil fuels to produce a wide range of products and energy.
t e   manage
i n e s & vac
  a lternativ
B e verages
B i o logics
t
a
M e d i c
s
e
a
M
W
ci
m
e
e
n
s
n
e
t
s
Biomass inputs could include:
  Agricultural biomass
i a g nostics
D
  Forestry biomass 
B iofuels
  Marine biomass 
i o   p lastics
B
 Food and food processing  
by-products 
  Whisky co-products 
  Carbon dioxide
a lysts
d itives
E
n
ri als
T
F
z
e
o
y
xtiles & m a t
Fine chem i c a l s
o
m
es & bio c a t
s
d & food   a d
e
Pigme n t
6
JUNE 2022 UPDATE 
7
[Page #4]
NATIONAL  PLAN F OR  IND U STR IAL  B IOT E C H N O LOGY 
REALI SING OUR NET ZERO AMBIT IONS
Key achievements timeline
KEY: POLICY  INDUSTRY ENGAGEMENT  INNOVATION  SKILLS  SUSTAINABLE MANUFACTURING  INFRASTRUCTURE
NOV
FEB
NOV
MAY
OCT
DEC
AUG
JAN
JUL
DEC
AUG
OCT
DEC
2013
2015
2015
2016
2016
2017
2018
2019
2019
2020
2021
2021
2021
First National 
Biorefinery Roadmap 
IBioIC ‘s first 
IBioIC’s second 
Announcement of 
IBioIC secure £11.1m 
Launch of the Scottish 
The National Plan 
Publication of the 
Analysis shows 147 
50th HND student 
Muir Construction 
IBioIC activities 
Plan in Industrial 
for Scotland launched
Scale-up centre: 
Scale-up centre: 
Scottish Enterprise 
Phase II funding from 
Bioresource Mapping 
for Industrial 
Scottish Enterprise 
active IB companies, 
commences their 
completes the build 
have resulted in the 
Rapid Bioprocess 
Flexible Downstream 
funded Industrial 
Scottish Funding 
tool, a Zero Waste 
Biotechnology Driving 
commissioned report: 
estimated turnover 
studies
of Scotland’s first 
development of over 
Biotechnology 
Prototyping Centre 
Bioprocessing Centre 
Biotechnology 
Council, Scottish 
Scotland project in 
Progress to 2025 
Opportunities for 
of £797m, over 3000 
multi-million-pound 
200 new products, 
launched with: 43 
(RBPC) opens 
(FlexBio) opens at 
Network Integrator 
Enterprise and 
collaboration with 
published. 111 IB 
‘Re-establishing Sugar 
direct employees 
biorefinery for Celtic 
processes and 
active IB companies, 
at University of 
Heriot Watt University
programme to support 
Highlands and Islands 
IBioIC
active companies 
Beet Production and 
and estimated GVA 
Renewables in 
services
estimated turnover of 
Strathclyde
broader industry 
Enterprise
in 2017, estimated 
Processing in Scotland’
contribution of £235m
Grangemouth
£189m, 1,103 direct 
engagement. This 
turnover of £357m
employees, £61m GVA 
was followed by the 
contribution
Bioeconomy Cluster 
Builder project
2013
2021
The National Plan 
Over £180m 
for Industrial 
private investment 
£10m investment: 
Biotechnology 
raised by industrial 
Launch of 
2015-2023: Building 
100th student 
Fuel Change launches 
biotechnology 
the Industrial 
Cellucomp opens first 
on Success was 
IBioIC secure £2.6m 
graduates from the 
its first challenge with 
ENOUGH (formerly 
companies in Scotland 
Biotechnology 
biorefinery plant in 
published. Over 50 
Scotland hosts the 
funding from BBSRC 
IBioIC 5th Annual 
MSc in Industrial 
AskBio acquires 
over 200 apprentices 
3F BIO) raises €42m 
100th PhD student 
including: Oceanium, 
Innovation Centre 
Scotland to produce 
active companies, 
2016 European 
for a Collaborative 
Conference with over 
Biotechnology, total 
Edinburgh-based 
from across Scotland 
in Series B funding 
commences their 
CuanTec, ENOUGH, 
(IBioIC), to accelerate 
advanced materials 
estimated turnover of 
Forum for Industrial 
Training Partnership - 
450 attendees making 
number of MSc 
Synpromics Ltd, 
tackling low carbon 
to supercharge 
research – total 
Over £90m invested 
Synpromics, Celtic 
the growth of IB in 
from by-products of 
£230m, exceeding the 
Biotechnology in 
later extended with a 
it the leading UK event 
students now exceeds 
following a large cash 
challenges set by 
sustainable protein 
number of PhDs 
in innovation activity 
Renewables, ScotBIO, 
Scotland
vegetable processing
expected target
Glasgow
further £3m funding
for the industry
200
infusion by investors
industry partners
production
started exceeds 120.
since 2013
MiAlgae, Cellucomp
FEB
MAR
NOV
OCT
NOV
JAN
NOV
AUG
AUG
JUN
OCT
NOV
DEC
2014
2015
2015
2016
2016
2018
2019
2020
2021
2021
2021
2021
2018
8
JUNE 2022 UPDATE 
9
[Page #5]
NATIONAL  PLAN F OR  IND U STR IAL  B IOT E C H N O LOGY 
REALI SING OUR NET ZERO AMBIT IONS
POLICY
Creating a policy environment that facilitates the adoption of IB 
Ambition 
Action 
Engage and support IB active organisations encompassing the industry, business, public sector, research communities, and further education, to make their net zero commitments public.
All IB active organisations to make net zero commitments, showing their dedication to meeting the Scottish Government’s net zero targets for 2045. 
the National Plan. IB features strongly 
Though there have been many positives, 
Following the first publication of the National Plan in 2013, and the establishment of IBioIC in 2014, the public profile of IB has been on the rise.  
as a key opportunity within Scottish 
there is still much to be done in securing 
Government strategies including 
IB positive policy. The more recent focus 
from governments on flagship net zero 
Climate Emergency Skills Action Plan 
(2020), Global Capital Investment 
and just transition policies for the future 
(2021), Scottish Government plans for 
will support the overarching ambitions 
Inward Investment (2020)
of the National Plan: IB is an essential 
Explore international examples of successful use of policy levers to change behaviours and work with UK Government, Scottish Government and Local Authorities to consider measures to promote bio-based products. 
Scottish Government policies have 
cross-cutting technology that can help 
increasingly shown support for IB 
In addition, leading economic 
deliver sustainability targets. 
as a key industry for growth and for 
influencers have voiced support for 
transitioning Scotland’s manufacturing 
biotechnology, including the Scottish 
Public acceptance and trust in IB 
Promote greener public procurement and drive change in supply chains.
sector from petrochemical-based 
Council for Development and Industry’s 
technology is also essential to create 
industries to sustainable alternatives. 
(SCDI) 2030 Blueprint for Scotland’s 
future consumers and viable markets. 
Work collaboratively with industry to create industry standards supporting bio-based labelling.
The inclusion of IB in the recent National 
Economy (2021).  
This will require future policy levers to 
Strategy for Economic Transformation 
accentuate the positive contributions IB 
Looking to the wider UK, the UK 
(2022) is recognition of the vital role 
can have relating to economic growth, 
Innovation Strategy (2021) champions 
that IB can play in Scotland’s economic 
mitigating climate change and building 
many of the ambitions of the National 
growth and drive to net zero.  
sustainable futures.
Drive broader and deeper engagement with key stakeholders and public facing trusted organisations, increasing public awareness, and encouraging a positive opinion of IB technology.  
Plan and recognises engineering biology 
Further progress has been made in the 
as one of the seven technology families 
Enhance the wider public understanding and acceptance of IB. 
policy arena since the 2019 refresh of 
of UK strength and opportunity.   
Key Target Areas for Securing Policy Support:
IBioIC’s new Policy Forum will work with the Scottish Bioeconomy Council to inform Scottish Government policy ensuring it is supportive of IB and provides knowledge-based decision making. 
Public acceptance and trust in IB technology is also essential to create future consumers and viable markets.
  Chemicals
Ensure Scotland has a positive policy environment to grow bio-based businesses and increase trade and investment for the benefit of the economy.
  Food and Drink
Partner with SDI to engage with the global private investor community to increase inward investment in IB projects in Scotland.
  Agriculture
  Pharmaceuticals
  Waste Management
Support the Scotland-wide policy for increasing green jobs as part of a just transition and sup-port the industries and economies of the future while ensuring there is appropriate skills and training policy provision. 
  Sustainable Fuels
To make life-long careers in IB more attractive.
  Aquaculture
  Circular Economy
10
JUNE 2022 UPDATE 
11
[Page #6]
NATIONAL  PLAN F OR  IND U STR IAL  B IOT E C H N O LOGY 
REALI SING OUR NET ZERO AMBIT IONS
INDUSTRY ENGAGEMENT
Increasing awareness of biotechnology as a tool for transformation and sustainable growth  
Ambition 
Action 
IBioIC engages with industry through:
 Raising awareness and encouraging 
Alongside the climate emergency, the Covid-19 pandemic and Brexit have undoubtedly impacted Scottish businesses and highlighted a significant opportunity to both secure and green supply chains. Businesses large and small, across a range of sectors from consumer products to chemicals, have begun to take action towards net zero, with many of the alternative products and processes underpinned by biotechnology. 
Increase adoption of biotechnology across Scottish industries to grow the bioeconomy and support the drive towards net zero
Continue funding of IBioIC as a vehicle to promote the benefits of adopting biotechnology across multiple industries. 
broader adoption of IB across non-
 Supporting the creation of new 
traditional sectors. The Bioeconomy 
companies and university spin-outs: 
Cluster Builder project, working in 
collaborating with Scottish Edge, 
partnership with other networks, 
Converge Challenge, the Royal 
has hosted 22 events with over 
Society of Edinburgh Enterprise 
1200 participants to date. 
Fellowship scheme, launching a 
Work with industry, government, and enterprise agencies to develop more sustainable supply chains and create a standard approach for assessing carbon impact of full value chains, driving the change to net zero. 
new spin-out award programme and 
While the IB sector in Scotland 
Support the greening of existing and new supply chains through biotechnology, including more local and circular solutions.
providing mentorship and technical 
continues to grow, it still needs 
consultancy. 
intervention and support to rise to 
the challenge ahead. The continued 
 Accelerating the growth of existing 
presence of support networks such as 
companies active in IB: linking to 
IBioIC is crucial to engage and support 
investors, de-risking innovation 
both existing IB businesses and those 
through project funding, and 
looking to adopt it in the future. Work is 
also still needed to cement the growing 
providing practical scale-up support 
Drive broader and deeper engagement with key stakeholders and public facing trusted organisations, increasing public awareness, and encouraging a positive opinion of IB technology.  
IB cluster within Scotland and make 
and bioprocess training. 
Enhance the wider public understanding and acceptance of IB. 
it an attractive proposition for inward 
Since the last update of the National 
investment from global companies.
Plan in 2019 the number of companies 
that deploy IB has risen from 111 
to 147, an increase of over 30%. 
The turnover attributed to those 
companies has also increased from 
£357m to £797m, an increase of over 
Key sectors for growth:
Work with government and enterprise agencies to develop a compelling proposition to promote Scotland as the go-to destination to incubate and grow bioeconomy businesses to scale.
Position companies utilising biotechnology as attractive inward investment opportunities for Scotland. 
220%. Although some of this growth 
will be attributed to the maturing of 
  Biopharmaceuticals and pharmaceuticals
businesses already active within the 
Scottish bioeconomy, the activity of 
  Food and drink
the bioeconomy is growing at pace and 
IBioIC has been a key driver through the 
  Consumer products 
connection of industry, academia and 
  Textiles
government, catalysing innovation, and 
accelerating commercialisation. 
Looking at best practice, design and deliver an accelerator programme to enable companies to secure investment.
  Construction
Help companies access finance to support their innovation journeys.
  Marine
  Agritech
12
JUNE 2022 UPDATE 
13
[Page #7]
NATIONAL  PLAN F OR  IND U STR IAL  B IOT E C H N O LOGY 
REALI SING OUR NET ZERO AMBIT IONS
INNOVATION
Facilitating innovation in IB and enhancing its adoption across multiple industries  
Ambition 
Action 
IBioIC to continue to be the key advocate and champion for IB in Scotland, raising its profile internationally and being the single point of contact for all stakeholders. 
Scotland continues to deliver world-
However, continued public and private 
Innovators develop new, or refresh existing, products or services to create value, which can be technological, environmental, social, and economic. By its very nature, innovation drives change, and change is imperative if we are to address the climate emergency. 
Clearly articulate and champion the application of IB in the decarbonisation of products and services. 
class research and innovation in 
investment in innovation is essential to 
biotechnology, which has been 
drive forward new ways of delivering 
translated into new businesses and 
essential green products and services.
company growth. Since its inception, 
IBioIC has seeded 120 collaborative 
 There is still a need to demonstrate 
research and development projects with 
the role of bio-based processes in 
Accelerate the adoption of IB across multiple sectors to improve their sustainability and longer-term growth, while achieving the end goal of net zero. 
Continue to broker and fund collaborative partnerships that can deliver biotechnology solutions to meet the pre-competitive needs of industry.
over 60 companies – an investment of 
the decarbonisation of our world, 
~£6.4m which has leveraged over £28m 
beyond energy and fuel – whether 
in funding and led to the development 
in food and drink, materials and 
of >200 new products, processes, and 
textiles, medicines, consumer 
services. IBioIC has also supported 
products, packaging, and 
IB offers innovative solutions to help 
over 200 companies in their innovation 
construction. 
society reduce its dependence on 
journeys, providing information, 
Build mechanisms that can generate new collaborations which facilitate value chains, business growth and new market opportunities for biotechnology.  
Create an online tool that maps IB supply chains and enables companies to identify potential suppliers and customers, optimising new supply chains.
petrochemical-derived products and 
guidance, technical expertise, funding, 
 The adoption of biotechnology 
services, thereby transitioning to 
skilled people and training to enable 
innovation will require ongoing 
greener, bio-based alternatives. As 
them to deploy biotechnology for 
encouragement and support. In 
Scotland strives to achieve net zero, 
business growth. 
particular, industry needs access to 
there is an important opportunity to 
the scale-up infrastructure needed 
nurture biotechnology innovation and 
Scotland is a key location for investment 
to successfully translate innovation 
accelerate its deployment.
in the emerging biotechnology industry, 
Nurture communication between sectors to enable the exchange of new ideas that help to improve business efficiency and de-risk new product development, using case studies to articulate benefits and value.
into industry-ready products 
winning 3% of the new jobs created in 
Communicate the benefits and values of IB, ensuring practitioners can clearly articulate the benefits of applying biotechnology in industry. 
the field in Europe over the last three 
and processes, which can be 
years and Scotland’s chemical sciences 
commercialised on global markets. 
research base is consistently ranked 
within the top three in the world. This 
gives a strong base to drive growth of 
the bioeconomy for Scotland.
Create an entrepreneurial environment with the skilled talent pool needed to drive business creation and growth.
Secure talent for growth through continued investment in skills and training. 
Scotland is a key location for investment in the emerging biotechnology industry, winning 3% of the new jobs created in the field in Europe over the last three years
Develop expertise and tools to support compa-nies and enable them to measure, benchmark and reduce their emissions and other environ-mental impacts.
Enable companies to measure and reduce emissions associated with their innovations during development.
14
JUNE 2022 UPDATE 
15
[Page #8]
NATIONAL  PLAN F OR  IND U STR IAL  B IOT E C H N O LOGY 
REALI SING OUR NET ZERO AMBIT IONS
SKILLS
Generating rewarding and high-quality careers in biotechnology, and providing the skills to meet the changing needs of the growing workforce  
Ambition 
Action 
To date, IBioIC’s Skills Programme, 
Skills are crucial in facilitating 
The IB workforce in Scotland grew from 1,100 jobs in 2013 to over 3,000 jobs in 2020, well ahead of the original target of 2,500 jobs by 2025. However, if we are to embrace the opportunity to green our supply chains, and grow the sector, we need to continue this upward trend. The development and delivery of skills to meet changing industry needs is essential. 
Establish a Biotechnology Skills Advisory Board to recognise industry needs, identify gaps in skills and training, develop education pathways and promote equality, diversity and inclusion.
Develop education pathways with clear progression routes and career options, supporting the creation of a diverse workforce. 
driven by industrial demand, has 
Scotland’s transition to net zero and 
delivered
will continue to play an important 
role in realising the ambition of a 
just transition that is both fair and 
  50 HND students in IB, 
inclusive. We need to adapt to the 
 more than 200 MSc students in IB, 
changing demand for skills, creating 
and 
an education and training system and 
Broaden engagement with STEM activity through the expansion of the RAiSE scheme and the UK Innovation Skills Transition Centre to raise awareness of IB as a technology and career option. 
a labour market that are more agile, 
  more than 100 PhD students.
proactive, responsive, and resilient than 
Greater engagement and education around the possibilities of biotechnology. 
ever before. Even accounting for the 
increase in provision of training, current 
Other achievements in skills and 
and projected demand for qualified 
training include: 
people in the sector significantly 
exceeds supply. 
 Fuel Change (see included success 
story), an initiative that encourages 
As companies grow and move to 
apprenticeships and graduates to 
Promote more broadly the opportunities in modern and foundation apprenticeships and HND courses to address the technician-level skills shortage.   
Since 2012, increased STEM activity 
manufacture products at commercial 
develop low carbon solutions for 
Increase uptake in skills training relative to technician roles. 
through the Raising Aspirations in 
scale, the demand for technician-level 
industry challenges. 
Science Education programme (RAiSE), 
skills increases dramatically. This is 
the Leaders in Science programme and 
already proving challenging for the 
 Launch of the UK Advanced 
the creation of Foundation and Modern 
early adopters of biotechnology. There 
Therapies Skills Training Networks, 
Apprenticeships in scientific disciplines 
is also an increasing need for skills 
led by Roslin Cell Therapies in 
has enhanced the skills base. 
that support related industries to 
collaboration with the Scottish 
Develop CPD courses to support lifelong learn-ing aligned with industry skills needs and engage with the appropriate growth and city deals. 
transition to a greener workforce. The 
Universities Life Sciences Alliance 
UK Innovation Skills Transition Centre 
Support the workforce to upskill and reskill enabling transition into new green jobs. 
(SULSA), IBioIC and academic 
project, a £4m Investment as part of 
institutions. 
Current and projected demand for qualified people in the sector significantly exceeds supply.
the Falkirk Growth Deal, will start to 
address this need.
 Establishment of the National 
Transition Training Fund, delivering 
Finally, to progress to net zero, industry 
upskilling and reskilling courses for 
will also need to be equipped with 
Develop a suite of tools for life cycle analy-sis that can be embedded within the industry alongside appropriate skills training and sup-port. 
life and chemical sciences.
the skills and tools to measure the 
Support companies with skills development to enable net zero ambitions.  
environmental impact and sustainability 
 Development of the Green Jobs 
of their new processes and products, 
Workforce Academy by Skills 
ensuring the advantage of bio-based over 
Development Scotland. 
traditional chemically derived products.
16
JUNE 2022 UPDATE 
17
[Page #9]
NATIONAL  PLAN F OR  IND U STR IAL  B IOT E C H N O LOGY 
REALI SING OUR NET ZERO AMBIT IONS
SUSTAINABLE MANUFACTURING
Greening supply chains and transitioning industries towards sustainable manufacturing  
Ambition 
Action 
However, techno-economic barriers still 
will soon deliver an update of the 
Scotland is well-positioned to lower its reliance on petrochemicals, to grow the bioeconomy and increase sustainable green jobs. The future plans for delivering renewable energy will power bio-based manufacturing and contribute to net zero carbon targets. 
Provision of up-to-date data for industry on the quantities, composition and location of usable biomass or waste appropriate for conversion to high value products via IB.
exist for using inputs such as forestry 
highly successful Scottish Bioresource 
Refresh and enhance the Bioresource Mapping Tool regularly to capture the six key resource streams. 
biomass, other than for the generation 
Mapping Tool (launched in 2018). 
of bioenergy through combustion. The 
This will continue to be a key asset 
Scottish Crown Estate Act 2019 prohibits 
for businesses looking for sustainable 
the wild harvest of certain kelp species 
bio-based feedstocks. 
inhibiting the growth or recovery of the 
Challenges still exist for businesses in 
plant, but small-scale wild harvesting 
making the transition from research 
does take place in Scotland and there 
Provide scale-up capabilities available to support the transition from R&D to manufacturing and de-risk larger scale investment.
and development into manufacturing 
is growing interest from industry in the 
Continue to grow IBioIC’s Scale-Up Centre capability and establish a further Bioeconomy Accelerator Pilot Plant at Grangemouth. 
at scale. Scotland has an opportunity 
cultivation of seaweed at scale. 
to create demonstrator-scale 
The most significant progress has been 
infrastructure that can accelerate the 
made around the use of agricultural 
commercialisation of cutting-edge 
At present, fossil fuel-derived feedstocks 
biomass and a successful Scottish 
science. Investments in advanced 
are essential manufacturing building 
Enterprise-funded viability study, led by 
manufacturing innovation in Scotland 
blocks for industries ranging from 
IBioIC, has demonstrated the potential 
such as the National Manufacturing 
fuels, chemicals and pharmaceuticals 
Engage with relevant city growth deals and key regional initiatives such as the Grangemouth Future Industry Board to transition major petrochemical clusters and carbon-intensive industries and support proposed innovation and infrastructure projects in these clusters. 
for the reintroduction of sugar beet as a 
Institute for Scotland (NMIS) and 
to the consumer goods and polymers 
Work closely with carbon-intensive regions in Scotland to provide sustainable manufacturing solutions, contributing to net zero carbon targets.
break crop and its subsequent biorefining 
Medicines Manufacturing Innovation 
sectors. A sustained focus not only on 
to a sugar feedstock for a range of bio-
Centre (MMIC) should also be 
primary production but on proactively 
based manufacturing processes. 
harnessed to drive opportunities to 
constructing new low carbon supply 
create new indigenous, sustainable 
chains is needed and this will require 
Zero Waste Scotland, Scotland’s 
bio-based manufacturing and secure 
growth in infrastructure, innovation 
circular economy expert with dedicated 
income from inward investment and the 
support and skills. Mapping bio-based 
bioeconomy expertise and resources, 
export of cutting-edge technologies.
manufacturing solutions onto the 
challenges of the main carbon-emitting 
regions in Scotland will be essential 
Apply the bio-based manufacturing expertise developed in IB across wider sectors such as advanced therapies, pharmaceuticals, textiles and food and drink. 
and the need to identify and quantify 
Grow IB opportunities based on bioresource feedstocks to develop new supply chains across related sectors.
Scotland’s key bio-based resource streams:
significant resources of sustainable 
biomass or waste streams on which to 
  Agricultural biomass
base this manufacturing must continue. 
  Forestry biomass 
Scotland has made good progress 
developing its bio-based economy, 
  Marine biomass 
with notable activity around whisky 
Develop an indigenous sustainable supply chain of sugar beet to form the foundations of Scotland’s future bio-based manufacturing sector.
Continue to drive all stakeholders – agriculture, manufacturing, finance and government – to-wards creation of sugar beet agriculture and associated infrastructure.  
co-products (e.g. Celtic Renewables, 
  Food and food processing by-products 
MiAlgae, Horizon Proteins, BioPower 
  Whisky co-products 
Technologies, Scotch Whisky Research 
Institute and IBioIC), food processing by-
  Carbon dioxide
products (e.g. CelluComp, Revive Eco) and 
marine biomass (e.g. CuanTec, Oceanium). 
18
JUNE 2022 UPDATE 
19
[Page #10]
NATIONAL  PLAN F OR  IND U STR IAL  B IOT E C H N O LOGY 
REALI SING OUR NET ZERO AMBIT IONS
INFRASTRUCTURE
Facilitating innovation in IB and enhancing its adoption across multiple industries  
Ambition 
Action 
However, three gaps in Scotland’s 
• 
 A lack of local pilot plant scale 
Scotland’s world class expertise and facilities provide the nation with a competitive advantage in IB and green tech. 
By learning from best practice internationally, build a business case for a dedicated Bioeconomy Accelerator space that meets the growing need for affordable lab and office space for biotechnology start-ups supported by technical and business advice, links to investors and access to talent.  
infrastructure are restricting faster 
capacity (up to 2,000L) results 
growth of the sector: 
in Scotland’s high-growth 
To develop affordable space for new start-ups to establish and grow their companies. 
potential companies traveling to 
• 
 There is a gap between strain 
Europe to access this capability. 
engineering and initial scale-up, 
Demonstrating a process at scale is 
Scotland has world class academic 
which could be addressed by 
vital to reducing the technical risk 
expertise in the underpinning enablers 
improved integration of publicly 
associated with securing private 
for IB (including engineered biology, 
funded research facilities. 
investment. The lack of national 
big data, advanced metrology, 
infrastructure, compromises 
fermentation, automation and robotics) 
• 
 Scotland is home to several 
and unique facilities such as the 
our companies’ ability to raise 
successful business incubators 
To ensure delivery of the Net Zero Accelerator programme, which incorporates facilities for product development via cell engineering and bioprocess research and development through to initial scale-up, alongside business support. 
University of Edinburgh’s Genome 
investment, get products to 
To develop an integrated development route from genome assembly and strain engineering through to pilot plant scale, allowing companies to seamlessly transition between facilities.
– BioCity Scotland, Edinburgh 
Foundry and the International Centre 
market and create jobs in Scotland.
BioQuarter, Roslin Innovation 
for Brewing and Distilling hosted by 
Centre, Heriot-Watt Research Park, 
Heriot-Watt University. The IBioIC Scale-
IBioIC has been actively seeking 
the European Marine Science Park 
up Centres have a highly skilled team 
support to address these three 
and the forthcoming Edinburgh 
to offer support for upstream process 
infrastructure gaps. The £20m+ Net 
Innovation Park – these are all 
optimisation, downstream processing 
Zero Accelerator programme aims to 
and data analysis up to 30L scale. 
operating at or near capacity. New 
incorporate facilities and business 
These assets support a healthy pipeline 
companies are forced to move 
support for new product development 
To ensure delivery of a Bioeconomy Accelerator Pilot Plant, seeded by funding secured via the Falkirk Growth Deal, to enable companies to de-risk business plans and secure the significant investment needed to get to market. 
of IB start-ups, spin-outs and inward 
further south to access suitable 
To increase scale-up facility provision in Scotland enabling growing companies to demonstrate the viability of their processes at pilot scale. 
from design to industrial scale-up. The 
investment opportunities.
space. 
Falkirk Growth Deal Head of Terms 
were agreed in December 2021 and 
include £10m initial funding for a 
Bioeconomy Accelerator Pilot Plant as 
part of a Sustainable Chemicals Campus 
at Grangemouth. These are rapidly 
developing areas that need nurtured 
with government support to fast track 
Ensure integration of the Bioeconomy Ac-celerator Pilot Plant with the Carbon Dioxide Utilisation Centre at the Sustainable Chemicals Campus to enable renewables-powered bio-technology-based carbon capture to manufac-ture high value products.
Scotland’s world class expertise and facilities provide the nation with a competitive advantage in IB and green tech.
the growth of a vibrant cluster of 
innovative businesses and anchor 
Support the development of biotech enabled carbon utilisation to drive net zero ambitions.
them in Scotland.
20
JUNE 2022 UPDATE 
21
[Page #11]
NATIONAL  PLAN F OR  IND U STR IAL  B IOT E C H N O LOGY 
REALI SING OUR NET ZERO AMBIT IONS
Oceanium
Fuel Change
Oceanium is developing and making seaweed-based products to benefit the health of people and planet. Creating a market for sustainably farmed seaweed, Oceanium hopes to generate systemic change in the food system and create jobs for rural coastal communities. 
Fuel Change is a social enterprise movement that taps into the potential of Scotland’s next generation to help fight the climate crisis. The not for profit organisation was launched in September 2020 and has empowered apprentices and graduates to develop innovative low carbon solutions to real issues currently being faced by industry. 
chemistry principles and a unique 
industry-leading biorefinery processing 
young people in Scotland. Fuel change 
Fuel Change has already brought 
biorefinery approach to work towards 
capabilities and will process well over 
is passionate about collaboration and 
500 young people together with 
zero waste and net zero production.  
100 tonnes of seaweed in 2022.  
sharing ideas.
businesses to develop low carbon 
The Oban-based company is on a 
solutions to real-life problems, 
journey to “Kelp The World®” through 
In 2021, Oceanium announced over 
Oceanium is a great example of 
Through real low-carbon challenges 
including the recent Grangemouth Net 
driving positive change and turning the 
€2 million in grant funding from the 
a Scottish IB company with global 
set by key industry partners, Fuel 
Zero Challenge supported by INEOS. 
tide on traditional manufacturing in 
European Maritime and Fisheries 
reach and ambition. 
Change’s ambition is to ensure 
Teams work with mentors to come up 
some of the world’s largest industries, 
Fund (EMFF) and closed their Seed 
Fuel Change is looking to build on the 
Scotland’s next generation can 
with solutions to carbon issues set 
such as cosmetics and food & drink. 
II fundraising with investment from 
momentum of the 2021 COP 26 UN 
become fully engaged in climate 
www.oceanium.world
by businesses with topics ranging 
Reporting its targeted impacts against 
impact-led investors including the World 
Climate Change Conference in Glasgow 
change by developing innovative but 
from sustainable manufacturing 
the UN’s Sustainable Development 
Wildlife Fund. Oceanium is using the 
to create a movement from the ground 
practical solutions to some of the 
and plastics to heat, energy and the 
Goals (SDGs), Oceanium applies green 
funding to support the scaling up of its 
up, led by the skills and energy of 
world’s most pressing issues.
circular economy.
Working with 21 schools from across 
Scotland, Fuel Change is developing 
a truly integrated approach to what 
climate education could look like 
across the entirety of Scotland’s 
curriculum.
www.fuelchange.co.uk
This is an exemplar of the following National Plan 2022 themes:   
This is an exemplar of the following National Plan 2022 themes:   
Innovation
Sustainable manufacturing
Innovation
Skills
Industry Engagement    
22
JUNE 2022 UPDATE 
23
[Page #12]
NATIONAL  PLAN F OR  IND U STR IAL  B IOT E C H N O LOGY 
REALI SING OUR NET ZERO AMBIT IONS
ScotBio
IBioIC
ScotBio has a singular goal: to make natural ingredients, which are good for people and the planet, available to everyone. 
The Industrial Biotechnology Innovation Centre (IBioIC) was established in 2014 to stimulate growth of the industrial biotechnology in Scotland.  IBioIC is recognised as a European centre of excellence and connects world-leading industry with outstanding academic expertise and government to bring new IB processes and products to the global market. IBioIC is a key driver of Scotland’s National Plan for Industrial Biotechnology. 
colours by providing manufacturers of 
ScotBio’s purpose-built manufacturing 
FMCGs (fast moving consumer goods) 
facility is located in the Scottish town 
with traceable, natural blue and green 
of Lockerbie, while the company’s 
colourants and plant based protein.
headquarters is in Glasgow’s BioCity.
Security of supply is critical in 
During the Covid-19 pandemic, ScotBio 
industry members, over 70% of which 
projects fostering academic-business 
The company is perhaps best known 
manufacturing, and ScotBio has found 
explored how the company’s advanced 
are SME or micro companies. To date, 
partnership and co-funded by business. 
for its unique and sustainable food 
a sustainable way to secure its supply 
technical skills and production 
IBioIC has provided support for over 200 
A total investment of £6.4 million has 
colourant, ScotBio Blue. The company 
in an innovative and reliable way. 
processes could be used for the 
companies, forming collaborations with 
leveraged an additional £28.5 million 
makes products from spirulina, a type 
Unlike producers who grow spirulina in 
creation and manufacture of treatments 
academia and other businesses, helping 
from businesses, follow-on funding from 
of algae, ensuring the products are 
outdoor ponds, ScotBio has an indoor 
for current and future virus pandemics.
IBioIC facilitates collaborations, provides 
them on their innovation journey. 
other sources or partnering with other 
natural, healthy and traceable. ScotBio 
production facility that is protected 
scale-up capabilities, creates networks 
funding initiatives.   
has developed a patented, vessel-
from the elements and operates to 
www.scotbio.com
Since its creation, IBioIC has supported 
and develops skills and training 
based process to respond to worldwide 
good manufacturing process (GMP) 
over 120 collaborative innovation 
IBioIC has welcomed 369 students 
provisions. IBioIC has more than 140 
demand for products free of artificial 
standards.
through its skills and training doors and 
has partnerships with 18 Universities 
and research institutes and four further 
education colleges across Scotland. 
In 2021 the IBioIC industry-ready 
PhD cohort reached 120, the MSc in 
Industrial Biotechnology including 
industry placement has graduated more 
than 200 students. IBioIC is a partner 
with Roslin Cell Therapies on one of three 
UK Advanced Therapies Skills Training 
Networks. IBioIC students are uniquely 
networked into the IBioIC community 
offering them a close connection to a 
wide and diverse industrial network.
www.ibioic.com
This is an exemplar of the following National Plan 2022 themes:   
This is an exemplar of the following National Plan 2022 themes:   
Innovation
Sustainable manufacturing
Innovation
Skills
Industry Engagement    
Policy
Infrastructure 
24
JUNE 2022 UPDATE 
25
[Page #13]
NATIONAL  PLAN F OR  IND U STR IAL  B IOT E C H N O LOGY 
REALI SING OUR NET ZERO AMBIT IONS
Closing Remarks
Celtic Renewables
Celtic Renewables’ patented low-carbon technology converts unwanted, low-value biological material into high-value, low-carbon sustainable chemicals and advanced biofuel. 
There has never been a more exciting time to be part of the revolution to transform how we approach manufacturing and sourcing of raw materials to create chemicals, develop new materials and products, produce novel foods and animal feed as well as new medicines.  
Celtic Renewables has constructed 
Crowd raise, focusing global media 
Scotland’s first multi-million-pound 
attention on Scotland’s biotech sector, 
biorefinery in Grangemouth, putting 
with the company now having raised 
This ambition is global in nature and Industrial Biotechnology (IB) holds the keys to a 
production at the heart of Scotland’s 
over £43m since its inception to 
growing worldwide market.  IBioIC provides an easy and innovative way to access the 
chemical cluster. The facility has the 
bring the technology from university 
best of new thinking and de-risking new processes.
The company has grown steadily 
capacity to produce 1 million litres of 
innovation to industrial operation.  
since 2011 and has received multiple 
sustainable biochemicals annually that 
IBioIC and our members have already contributed to the substantial growth of IB in 
awards and accolades for its cleantech 
With ambitious plans for full scale 
will displace fossil-fuel equivalents 
Scotland and beyond and this refreshed plan sets out the roadmap for our future 
proposition including the “Most 
deployment in Scotland and around 
across a broad range of markets from 
ambitions for the growth and engagement with IB. 
Innovative Biotech SME in Europe” 
the world, the company is looking to 
cosmetics to food.  
award from the EU parliament – setting 
penetrate a biochemicals market set 
We will support the development of policy, by working with Government, the public, 
a high bar for the future of sustainable 
Celtic Renewables recently completed 
to be worth over £40 bn by 2025. This 
business and others, to underpin the reduction in use of fossil fuels in manufacturing 
manufacturing. 
a further successful and high-profile 
work is already underway as Celtic 
to help meet Scotland’s target of Net Zero by 2045.  We will accelerate the 
Renewables has already signed its first 
identification of new opportunities for business and the adoption of innovative IB 
major customer in the bio-solvents 
technology and we will help create rewarding smart jobs and the skilled people to 
space with a strong pipeline 
deliver them.  IBioIC will help transform our ability to deliver sustainable economic 
of customer demand globally.  
growth and attract inward investment by building on our track record and reputation 
of delivery and partnership.
Celtic Renewables are playing a pivotal 
role in the transition to net zero and 
I hope that you, like me, are excited by our refreshed Industrial Biotechnology plan 
growing a sustainable bioeconomy. 
and that you will want to work with us to achieve our common goals of ensuring we 
have a safe, healthy and sustainable environment, the opportunity to drive the green 
www.celtic-renewables.com
economy and equip our workforce with the skills they need to deliver this.  We at 
IBioIC look forward to working with you to make sure that you are part of the most 
important industrial revolution our planet has ever needed.
Professor Dame Anne Glover 
Chair, IBioIC
This is an exemplar of the following National Plan 2022 themes:   
Innovation
Sustainable manufacturing
Infrastructure 
26
JUNE 2022 UPDATE 
27
[Page #14]
This document has been prepared by IBioIC.
IBioIC 
Inovo 
121 George Street 
Glasgow 
G1 1RD
Email: info@ibioic.com 
www.ibioic.com
