[Page #0]
The UK’s research and innovation infrastructure: opportunities to grow our capability
[Page #1]
None
[Page #2]
None
[Page #3]
Contents
Foreword Executive summary Chapter 1:   Strategic context Chapter 2:   Purpose of the Infrastructure Roadmap Programme 
128141515161719212324454648496465667086878889100101102104114115117118127129130132136137138140143146149150152153156158159161
2.1  Programme objectives 2.2	 Scope	and	definition	of	research	and	innovation	infrastructure	2.3	 Developing	the	report	2.4	 Aim	of	this	report	
Chapter 3:   Biological sciences, health and food sector 
3.1	 Overview	of	current	capability	3.2  Future direction 3.3  Future requirements and opportunities 
Chapter 4:   Physical sciences and engineering sector 
4.1	 Overview	of	current	capability	4.2  Future direction 4.3  Future requirements and opportunities Chapter 5:   Social sciences, arts and humanities sector	
5.1	 Overview	of	current	capability	5.2	 Future	direction	5.3	 Future	requirements	and	opportunities	
Chapter 6:   Environment sector	
6.1	 Overview	of	current	capability	6.2	 Future	direction	6.3	 Future	requirements	and	opportunities	
Chapter 7:   Energy sector	
7.1	 Overview	of	current	capability	7.2	 Future	direction	7.3	 Future	requirements	and	opportunities	
Chapter 8:   Computational and e-infrastructure sector 
8.1		 Overview	of	current	capability	8.2		 Future	direction	8.3   Future requirements and opportunities 
Chapter 9:   Large-scale, multi-sector facilities	
9.1		 Overview	of	current	capability	9.2		 Future	direction	9.3   Future requirements and opportunities 
Chapter 10:   Evolving and connecting the landscape	
10.1		 International	collaboration	10.2		 Connecting	capability	at	a	national	scale	10.3		 Clusters	and	local	economies	10.4		 Creating	connectivity	10.5	 Integrating	innovation	
Chapter 11:   Critical enablers and policy issues 
11.1		 Skills	and	training	11.2   Data management and access 11.3		 Sustainability	of	infrastructures	
Chapter 12:   Next steps Acknowledgements Acronyms and abbreviations References	
Front cover image credits: Top - Met Office, Middle - UK Research and Innovation .Inside cover illustration: Helen Towrie, UK Research and Innovation.
[Page #4]
Foreword
aspirations	are	ambitious,	but	delivery	of	the	Industrial	Strategy	and	2.4%	goal	requires	this.	
We	are	at	one	of	the	most	important,	exciting	and	challenging	times	in	the	history	of	global	enterprise.	Powered	by	new	technologies,	the	way	we	live	our	lives	is	being	transformed	across	the	world.	The	UK	is	extraordinarily	well-placed	to	benefit	from	this	new	industrial	revolution.	We	are	an	open,	enterprising	economy,	built	on	invention,	innovation	and	competition.	
The	UK’s	global	stature	in	research	and	innovation	is	underpinned	by	a	long	history	of	funding	world-class	research	and	innovation	infrastructure.	This	infrastructure	brings	together	global	talent	from	across	disciplines	and	economic	sectors	to	tackle	society’s	most	complex	challenges	and	drive	economic	growth.	Research	and	innovation	infrastructure	is	not	only	funded	through	UK	Research	and	Innovation	and	its	councils.	Many	public	sector	organisations	support	research	and	innovation	capability	within	the	UK	and	we	would	like	to	recognise	the	contribution	and	support	from	many	of	these	over	the	course	of	this	programme.	Close	collaboration	with	international	partners	also	provides	the	UK	research	and	innovation	community	with	access	to	critical	capability	all	around	the	world.	
Research	and	development	has	a	central	role	to	play	in	responding	to	the	challenges	we	face	and	taking	full	advantage	of	the	opportunities	they	offer.	It	is	core	to	the	successful	delivery	of	the	four	Grand	Challenges	identified	in	the	UK’s	Industrial	Strategy,	which	aim	to	put	the	UK	at	the	forefront	of	tackling	global	seismic	transitions	and	grow	the	industries	of	the	future.	Recognising	this	transformational	potential,	the	government	has	positioned	research	and	development	at	the	heart	of	the	Industrial	Strategy set an ambitious target to increase total investment	in	Research	and	development	to	at	least	2.4%	of	Gross	Domestic	Product	by	2027.
This	programme	has	been	an	ambitious	one;	the	UK	has	never	undertaken	an	exercise	of	this	scale	before.	We	recognise	that,	within	the	time	available,	it	has	not	been	possible	to	capture	everything	we	would	have	liked	and	we	are	grateful	for	the	input	that	many	expert	stakeholders	have	made	to	the	process.	This	report	will	inform	our	approach	to	the	UK	Research	and	Innovation	infrastructure	portfolio	and	provides	a	solid	basis	for	building	our	understanding and exploring particular issues  in	more	depth.
As	part	of	the	approach	to	realising	the	government’s	Industrial	Strategy,	UK	Research	and	Innovation	was	commissioned	to	develop	a	research	and	innovation	infrastructure	roadmap.	This	report	provides	an	assessment	of	the	future	infrastructure	landscape	and	strategic	themes	which	could	create	a	step-change	in	the	UK’s	capability	over	the	next	ten	years.	The	report	will	be	used	as	a	strategic	guide	to	inform	future	investment	decisions	across	the	landscape.	Our	
Professor Mark ThomsonExecutive Chair of the Science and Technology Facilities Council (STFC) and Senior Responsible Officer for the UK Research and Innovation infrastructure roadmap programme
Sir Mark WalportChief Executive Officer of UK Research and Innovation
1
[Page #5]
Executive summary
This report provides an assessment of the future research and innovation infrastructure landscape. It identifies potential opportunities to create a step-change in the next-generation of infrastructure capability and options for resulting investment and is intended to guide decision-making and identification of priorities to 2030.
of	R&D	expenditure2. Every £1 spent on public R&D	unlocks	£1.40	of	private	R&D	investment3,	together	delivering	£7	of	net-economic	benefit	 to	the	UK4.
Research	and	Development	(R&D)	has	a	central	role	to	play	in	driving	economic	growth.	It	is	core	to	the	successful	delivery	of	the	four	Grand	Challenges	identified	in	the	Industrial	Strategy,	which	aim	to	put	the	UK	at	the	forefront	of	tackling global seismic transitions and grow the	industries	of	the	future.	The	ability	to	develop	new	ideas	and	deploy	them	is	one	of	the	UK’s	greatest	strengths.	Today	the	UK	is	globally	recognised	as	a	leader	in	research	and	innovation,	having	the	most	productive	science	base	in	the	G7	based	on	field-weighted	citations	impact1	and	research	papers	produced	per	unit	
We	are	highly	successful	in	translating	knowledge	into	real-world	societal,	economic	and	international	benefit	–	estimates	suggest	that	more	than	half	of	the	UK’s	future	productivity	growth	will	be	driven	by	the	application	of	new	ideas,	research	and	technology	to	create	new	processes,	products	and services5.
IDEAS
Excellence acrossthe UKNew technologiesAttracting globaltalent
BUSINESSENVIRONMENT
PEOPLE
Research andtechnical professionalsPriority skills needsData and analytics
Inward investmentCollaborative cultureDe-risking scale-up
RESEARCH ANDINNOVATIONINFRASTRUCTURE
Helping to make theUK the world’s mostinnovative economy
PLACES
INFRA-STRUCTURE
Access tointernational research and innovation infrastructuresRegional economiesCampuses andclusters
Critical nationalinfrastructureSustainable research andinnovation infrastructuresData infrastructure
GRAND CHALLENGES
AI and DataAgeing SocietyClean GrowthFuture of Mobility
Figure	1.	The	Industrial	Strategy	sets	the	ambition	for	the	UK	to	be	the	world’s	most	innovative	economy.	Research	and	innovation	infrastructures	contribute	across	the	strategy	and	to	each	of	the	Grand	Challenges.
2
[Page #6]
We	want	to	build	on	this	tradition	of	innovation	and	on	our	current	strengths.	The	Industrial	Strategy10	sets	the	ambition	for	the	UK	to	be	the	world’s	most	innovative	economy	and	the	government	is	committed	to	raise	total	R&D	investment	to	at	least	2.4%	of	Gross	Domestic	Product	(GDP)	by	2027.	Linked	to	the	Industrial	Strategy	are	four	Grand	Challenges	that	ensure	a	clear	focus	on	areas	of	existing	strength	and	global	opportunities:	putting	the	UK	at	the	forefront	of	the	Artificial	Intelligence	(AI)	and	data	revolution;	maximising	the	advantages	for	UK	industry	from	the	global	shift	to	Clean	Growth;	becoming	a	world	leader	in	shaping	 the	Future	of	Mobility;	and	harnessing	the	power	of	innovation	to	help	meet	the	needs	of	an	Ageing Society.
These	successes	are	in	large	part	founded	on	a	network	of	internationally	competitive,	high-quality	and	accessible	research	and	innovation	infrastructures.	This	programme	has	defined	research	and	innovation	infrastructure	broadly,	ranging	from	big	physical	research	facilities	such	as	synchrotrons,	research	ships	and	scientific	satellites,	to	knowledge-based	resources	such	as	scientific,	cultural	or	artistic	collections,	archives	and	scientific	data,	data	and computing systems and communication networks,	test	beds,	demonstrators	and	living	labs	which	can	simulate	how	innovations	might	work	in	the	real-world.	Our	analysis	of	the	UK	landscape	has	revealed	over	500	nationally	and	internationally	significant	infrastructures	with	a	breadth	of	expertise	across	sectors	with	92%	of	these	infrastructures	working	across	multiple	domains.	Over	three	quarters	of	infrastructures	in	our	analysis	report	that	they	work	with	business	and	42%	with	public	policy.	Evaluation	of	individual	infrastructures	demonstrates	the	wider	impacts	on	the	economy:	
This	report	identifies	potential	opportunities	to	strengthen	and	expand	our	already	impressive	national	and	international	infrastructure	capability,	on	the	way	to	achieving	our	wider	ambitions.	It	identifies	opportunities	to	create	a	step-change	in	the	next-generation	of	infrastructure	capability	–	both	within	the	UK	and	through	international	partnerships	–	and	options	for	resulting	investment	in	key	thematic	areas	(Figure	2).	Among	others,	these	include:
  The	European	Molecular	Biology	Laboratory	–	European	Bioinformatics	Institute	(EMBL-EBI)	at	Hinxton	manages	public	life	science	data	on	a	very	large-scale.	EMBL-EBI	data	and services provide an estimated £1 billion per	annum	of	efficiency	gain	benefits	for	its	users	(equivalent	to	more	than	twenty	times	the	direct	annual	operational	cost	of	EMBL-EBI).	In	addition,	it	underpins	future	economic	impacts	worth	£335	million	annually6
  Developing	new	highly	advanced	technologies	to	explore	the	workings	of	the	Universe	and	planetary climate systems down to individual cells	and	the	atomic	structure	of	materials
  Using	new	technologies	to	enhance	access	
  A	recent	evaluation	of	forty-one	mid-scale	
to	our	unique	museum	collections,	to	harness	our	heritage	for	future	generations
research	infrastructure	case	studies	estimated an average return on investment  of	£3.40	per	£1	spent7
  Achieving	a	step-change	in	technological	
capability	and	the	availability	of	data	–	from	next-generation	sensors	to	the	exascale	computing	challenge	–	to	observe,	model,	predict	and	simulate,	and	also	to	engage	people,	unlocking	information	about	our	planet,	our	society	and	ourselves
  The	ISIS	Neutron	and	Muon	source	based	at	the	Harwell	Campus	is	expected	to	deliver	£1.4	billion	of	net	economic	benefit	based	on	its	work	to	2014,	with	a	further	£1.4	billion	of	economic	benefit	predicted	up	to	20308
  Developing	new	ways	to	test	and	de-risk	technologies	or	ideas	which	are	close	to	market application
  Estimates	suggest	the	Babraham	Research	Campus	(supporting	early	stage	bioscience)	has	helped	create	6,673	high	value	jobs	and	generated	£298	million	of	value	for	the	UK9
Between	2015/16	and	2020/21,	the	Department	for	Business,	Energy	and	Industrial	Strategy	(BEIS)	and	UK	Research	and	Innovation	have	committed	to	spend	over	£7.5	billion	of	capital	funding	on	research	and	innovation	infrastructurei. 
i		This	includes	allocations	through	the	Science	Capital	Ringfence	and	to	Innovate	UK’s	Catapults	programme
3
[Page #7]
•  Understanding	 the	Universe
•  Multiscale	biology,	biological	imaging,	structural biology and ‘omics	technologies
•  New	data	infrastructures	
to	inform	the	major	challenges	of	our	time,		e.g.	productivity,	health	and wellbeing
•  Novel	technologies	 for	next-generation	infrastructures
•  Biosecurity	for	the	life	
sciences 
•  Driving innovation 
and	growth	in	existing	infrastructures,	including	the	future	of	data	access	and analysis
•  Catalysing	 
•  Human	phenotyping	 (at	depth	and	scale)
seitinamuhdnastra
doofdnahtlaeh
productive	growth	(manufacturing,	stress	engineering,	quantum	technologies)
gnireengnednasecneicsl
•  Population	data	for	 
health	research
•  Creative	industries	and	
design
•  Food	safety	and	nutrition
i
•  Technologies	to	improve	health
•  Unlocking	potential	of	our	cultural	heritage
•  Advanced animal 
genomics,	developmental	biology and breeding infrastructures
•  Future transport 
•  Future policy enablers
solutions
,secneicsl
•  Plant	genetics,	pathology,	
•  Enhancing	future	connected digital technologies
,secneicsl
phenotyping	and	 agri-technology
•  Innovation	in	
biotechnology	and	biomedical science
acigooB
acisyhP
aicoS
•  E-infrastructure	for	 
l
life	sciences
i
erutcurtsarfni-edna
•  Sentinels	of	change	–	structures	focused	on	global	change	such	as	fleets	of	underwater	autonomous	vehicles	
•  Whole	energy	systems	–	including	energy	transmission and use
•  Supercomputing
•  Data	infrastructure	for	storing and managing access to vast quantities of	data
•  Fuel	cells	and	hydrogen
•  Energy storage
•  Labs	for	observing	–	
•  Cloud	computing
•  Renewable energy 
integrated	networks	of	sensors and instruments 
sources
•  The	National	network	to	connect universities and research	organisations
•  Alternative	fuels
•  Labs	for	simulation	
l
and	prediction	–	next-	generation super computing
anoitatupmoC
•  Nuclear	energy	–	fission	
•  Authentication,	
tnemnorivnE
and	fusion
Authorisation	and	Accounting Infrastructure	(AAAI)
•  Carbon	capture	and	
•  Labs	for	data	analytics	and	machine	learning
storage
ygrenE
•  Software	and	skills
Figure	2.	Key	themes	across	sectors.
44
[Page #8]
In	developing	this	report,	key	themes	emerged	early	in	the	process.	These	are	at	the	heart	of	our	ambition	to	enhance	the	UK’s	research	and	innovation	infrastructure	capability	and	create	an	interconnected	landscape:
standards	without	which	most	modern	research	would not be possible.
Our	ambition	is	to	host	a	world-class	national	exascale	supercomputing	facility	by	the	 middle	of	the	next	decade	and	to	accelerate	data-intensive	research	by	providing	 increased capacity and capability across  the	e-infrastructure	ecosystem.	
The importance of investing in  the talent pipeline To	develop	the	researchers,	innovators,	engineers,	technical	professionals	and	other	specialist	roles	needed	to	build,	maintain	and	use	our	infrastructure,	we	need	a	strong	and	interconnected talent pipeline across all sectors and	across	career	stages,	and	we	must	offer	effective	career	support.	This	pipeline	must	also	be	flexible,	to	identify	and	meet	skills	and	training	needs	as	new	technologies	develop	or	as	gaps	emerge	when	supply	exceeds	demand	in	both	business	and	academia.	Of	immediate	importance	is	the	provision	of	technical	professionals	with	digital,	data	science	and	 AI	skills.	
Changing economic context, new technologies and practices are transforming the way research and innovation is undertakenThe	world	is	on	the	cusp	of	a	‘fourth	industrial	revolution’,	with	developments	in	‘big	data’,	digitisation,	synthetic	biology	and	AI	driving	a	change	in	the	nature	of	the	economy.	Venture	capital	investment	in	the	UK’s	growing	AI	sector	leapt	almost	sixfold	from	2014	to	2018,	with	funding	amounting	to	almost	as	much	as	in	the	rest	of	Europe	combined,	and	investment	in	UK	AI	start-ups	reached	US$1.3	billion	in	201812.	The	‘lab	of	the	future’	could	look	and	feel	very	different	to	today	as	the	challenge	of	increasing	volumes	of	data	and	the	opportunities	from	AI	and	machine	learning	impact across all disciplines and sectors. For example,	enhancements	in	modelling	and	simulation	capability	coupled	with	real-world	experimentation are improving our ability to test	and	validate	new	ideas,	products	and	processes	at	scale,	driving	economic	growth.	The	UK	has	considerable	strengths	in	‘big	data’	science	which	we	can	build	on	in	future	years.	Yet	this	data	explosion	also	brings	challenges	for	infrastructures	in	successfully	manipulating,	curating,	storing	and	using	massively	abundant	data	sets	across	differing	formats	and	types,	and	across	distributed	networks.	UK	Research	and	Innovation	recognises	more	work	is	needed	in	this	area	and	will	take	this	forward.
In	these	areas,	demand	already	exceeds	supply	and	shortages	will	become	more	acute	in	response	to	the	infrastructure	requirements	described	throughout	this	report.	Labour	market	analysis	commissioned	by	the	Royal	Society	found	that	one	in	two	job	adverts	for	data	scientists	require	machine	learning,	and	one	in	eight	demand	AI	–	an	increase	of	more	than	3,000%	and	7,000%	respectively	since	201311.
In	developing	its	talent	and	skills	strategy,	UK	Research	and	Innovation	is	taking	an	overarching	view	on	what	a	healthy	and	thriving	future	research	and	innovation	workforce	will	look	like	and	the	interventions	required	in	the	context	of	delivering	the	2.4%	target.
The provision of robust and effective e-infrastructure E-infrastructure	is	an	essential	and	pervasive	requirement	and	there	is	certainty	of	growth	in	demand	and	rapid	development	in	technology	in	both	business	and	academia.	To	remain	at	the	forefront	of	research	and	innovation	the	UK	needs	a	long-term,	strategic	programme	of	investment	in	e-infrastructure.	This	infrastructure	will	need	to	be	both	diverse,	to	reflect	the	different	needs	of	academia	and	business,	and	integrated	to	ensure	effective	use	of	resources.	E-infrastructure	is	not	just	computers	and	data	storage	hardware,	but	also	includes	the	software,	networks,	security	and	
In	addition,	new	business	models	are	leading	to	greater	outsourcing	of	R&D	to	specialist	R&D	services	and	innovative	small-	and	medium-sized	enterprises,	even	as	the	divide	between	services	and	manufacturing	becomes	more blurred13.	The	pace	of	this	change	is	increasing,	driving	more	complex	interactions	and	challenging	the	way	researchers	and	innovators work14.	Business	and	researcher	needs increasingly drive a requirement to work at	scale	and	across	disciplines	challenging	traditional	mechanisms	of	quality	assurance.	
5
[Page #9]
The	disruptive	nature	of	these	changes	can	in	part	be	addressed	through	the	development	of	demonstrators	and	other	–	near-market	projects	to	test	solutions	in	real-life	conditions:	those	designed	to	take	a	‘whole	systems’	approach	and	those	focused	on	de-risking	or	scaling-up	implementation.	This	includes,	for	example	testing	how	energy	technologies	might	work	at	scale	and	trialling	development	of	autonomous	vehicles	or	novel	approaches	to	the	manufacture	of	pharmaceuticals.	
heritage	databases	and	knowledge	transfer	processes.	The	UK	needs	to	remain	an	active	partner	internationally	to	continue	to	benefit	from	the	sharing	of	knowledge,	expertise,	data	and	capability	across	organisations,	borders	 and continents.
Sustainability of infrastructuresResearch	and	innovation	infrastructures	are	long-term	investments,	often	spanning	decades	from	planning	through	development	to	operation.	Many	evolve	or	are	repurposed	over	time	to	respond	to	demand	from	users	or	the	disruptive	effect	of	new	technologies	before	eventual	decommissioning.	For	others	their	value increases over time as data accumulates. Crucially,	sustainability	requires	stable	financial	support	and	a	long-term	investment	plan.	 60%	of	infrastructures	in	our	analysis	have	an	expected	operational	lifetime	of	over	twenty-five	years	but	only	41%	felt	able	to	plan	one	to	three	years	ahead.
Operating at scale:  building and enhancing national  and international connectionsCross-disciplinary	and	cross-sectoral	working	at	all	scales	enables	more	productive	and	efficient	use	of	infrastructure.	
Places	are	at	the	heart	of	the	Industrial	Strategy.	At	a	local	level,	cooperation	between	geographically	close	research	and	innovation	infrastructures	and	businesses	can	create	a	cluster	effect	that	leads	to	enhanced	innovation	and	partnerships.	This	critical	mass	can	attract	new	businesses	and	people,	which	fosters	further	growth,	boosts	local	employment	and	enables	cross-sector	working.	Over	time,	this	can	create	an	innovation	infrastructure	that	is	greater	than	the	sum	of	its	parts	with	a	strong	reputation,	which	can	be	leveraged	to	attract	further	business.	
Budgets	will	always	be	finite	and,	as	the	UK	expands	its	research	and	innovation	infrastructure	toward	the	2.4%	target,	we	must ensure appropriate tensioning between development and investment in new capability on	the	one	hand,	and	the	requirement	to	maintain,	develop	and	decommission	existing	infrastructures	on	the	other.	
In	addition,	investment	is	required	in	‘continuous	improvement’	to	underpinning	technologies,	methodologies	and	techniques	such	as	sensor	technology,	imaging,	data	analysis	methodologies	and	curation	techniques.	
At	a	national	level,	we	need	to	invest	in	strategic	infrastructure	networks	and	forge	better	linkages	between	existing	infrastructure.	This	distributed	infrastructure	can	be	focused	around	a	core	technology	or	methodology,	or	a	research	topic	or	application.	This	requires	a	proactive	community	that	is	fully	engaged	in	scoping	the	requirements.	The	rewards	are	the	potential	to	operate	at	greater	scale;	more	effective	use	of	resources;	more	coherent	ways	to	develop	common	skill	sets;	sharing	of	good	practice;	and	fostering	innovation	in	methods	which	inform	the	planning	of	subsequent	infrastructure.
Next stepsThis	report	and	accompanying	Landscape	Analysis	provide	an	overview	and	assessment	of	existing	UK	infrastructure	and	key	international	facilities	in	which	the	UK	participates.	This	report	is	intended	as	a	strategic	guide	to	inform	future	investment	decisions	and	identification	of	priorities	for	the	next-generation	of	infrastructure	to	2030.	In	the	context	of	the	goal	to	reach	at	least	2.4%	of	UK	GDP	invested	in	R&D	by	2027,	this	report	is	deliberately	ambitious	and	provides	an	overview	of	potential	infrastructure	opportunities	that	could	lead	to	a	step-change	in	the	capability	available	to	researchers	and	innovators	over	the	next	ten	years.	We	have	not	attempted	to	prioritise	the	opportunities	described	here.
The	Smith	Review	demonstrates	the	importance	of	international	collaboration.	Many	research	and	innovation	infrastructures	are	too	big,	complex	or	expensive	for	a	single	country	to	build	and	manage	alone.	Creation	of	international	partnerships	enables	research	and	innovation	at	scale,	whether	it	be	multinational	physical	science	facilities,	continent-wide	distributed	e-infrastructure	networks,	or	global	
6
[Page #10]
Ultimately,	future	funding	to	develop	existing	infrastructures	or	create	new	capability	set	out	here	will	be	dependent	on	strategic	investment	decisions	and	the	availability	of	funding	from	a	range	of	organisations	including	the	government	and	UK	Research	and	Innovation.	UK	Research	and	Innovation	is	establishing	a	clear	approach	to	managing	its	infrastructure	portfolio	to	address	issues	of	sustainability	and	continue	to	ensure	value	for	public	investment.	We	will	use	this	report	to	inform	the	prioritisation	of	infrastructure	investments	(Figure	3)	alongside	additional	work	to	explore	implementation,	costs	and	feasibility	of	projects	and	to	define	and	scope	ideas	which	are	at	earlier	stages	of	development	in	anticipation	they	can	feed	into	the	portfolio	over	time.	
charitable	organisations,	universities,	Public	Sector	Research	Establishments	(PSREs),	the	Catapult	network,	government	departments,	funding	bodies,	the	Devolved	Administrations	and	UK	Research	and	Innovation’s	extensive	network	of	advisory	committees.	The	programme	has	also	drawn	on	an	Advisory	Board,	which	includes	representatives	from	UK	Research	and	Innovation	Councils,	the	Department	for	Business,	Energy	and	Industrial	Strategy	(BEIS),	BEIS-funded	PSREs,	Universities	UK,	the	Association	for	Innovation,	Research	and	Technology	Organisations	(AIRTO),	Devolved	Funders	and	the	Royal	Society.	We	are	also	grateful	for	insights	from	colleagues	responsible	for	the	development	of	roadmaps	in	other	countries	and	from	the	European	Strategy	Forum	on	Research	Infrastructures	(ESFRI),	and	to	international	representatives	who	participated	in	a	workshop	at	the	2019	Annual	Meeting	of	the	American	Association	for	the	Advancement	of	Science	(AAAS).	
We	are	grateful	for	the	substantial	support	and	input	from	across	academia,	representative	bodies	and	learned	societies,	business	networks,	
Analysis of theresearch andinnovation infrastructurelandscape, future needs andopportunities
Operation,monitoring and evaluation. Reviewand refresh
Define strategicthemes andinfrastructureopportunities
This report
INFRASTRUCTUREPLANNING
Prioritise infrastructureinvestments within and across strategic themes
Planning,preparation andconstruction
Developdetailedbusiness cases
Figure	3.	Overview	of	the	infrastructure	planning	process.
7
[Page #11]
Chapter 1: Strategic context
8
[Page #12]
The Industrial Strategy10 sets the ambition for the UK to be the world’s most innovative economy and the government is committed to raise total R&D investment to 2.4% of GDP by 2027. Our ability to innovate – to develop new ideas and deploy them – is one of the UK’s great historic strengths, bringing significant benefit to the economy and society. Research and innovation infrastructures bring together talent from the public and private sectors and across disciplines to tackle society’s most complex challenges and generate knowledge and capability critical to UK policy, security and wellbeing. This includes the Grand Challenges set out in the Industrial Strategy: putting the UK at the forefront of the AI and data revolution, maximising the advantages for UK industry from the global shift to Clean Growth, becoming a world leader in shaping the Future of Mobility, and harnessing the power of innovation to help meet the needs of an Ageing Society. 
Estimates	suggest	that	over	half	of	the	UK’s	future	productivity	growth	will	be	driven	by	the	application	of	new	ideas,	research	and	technology	to	create	new	processes,	products	and services3.	This	is	expected	to	increase	over	time	as	the	pace	of	technological	change	increases	the	importance	of	knowledge-based	capital.	The	UK	has	the	most	productive	science	base	in	the	G7,	ranking	first	for	field-weighted	citations	impact	(a	measure	of	research	quality)1,15	and	number	of	research	papers	produced	per	unit	of	R&D	expenditure2.	The	UK	also	ranks	fifth	in	the	Global	Innovation	Index5,16. Every	£1	spent	on	public	R&D	unlocks	£1.40	of	private	R&D	investment3,	together	delivering	£7	of	net-economic	benefit	to	the	UK4.	This	includes	investment	from	overseas,	helping	to	make	the	UK	a	location	of	choice	for	businesses	at	the	cutting	edge	of	innovation	and	technology;	the	UK	attracts	more	overseas	investment	in	R&D	than	many	other	countries17.
including	those	supported	through	Sector	Deals	as	part	of	the	Industrial	Strategy.Others	perform	vital	functions	for	government	policy-makers	including	statutory	functions,	informing	public	policy,	improving	public	services	and	supporting	resilience and response to emergencies. Evaluation	of	individual	infrastructures	demonstrates	these	real-world	impacts:	
  The	European	Molecular	Biology	Laboratory	–	European	Bioinformatics	Institute	(EMBL-EBI)	at	Hinxton	manages	public	life	science	data	on	a	very	large-scale.	EMBL-EBI	data	and	services provide an estimated £1 billion per annum	of	benefits	for	its	users	(equivalent	to	more	than	twenty	times	the	direct	annual	operational	cost	of	EMBL-EBI).	In	addition,	it	underpins	future	economic	impacts	worth	£335 million annually6
  A	recent	evaluation	of	41	mid-scale	research	infrastructure	case	studies	estimated	an	average	return	on	investment	of	£3.40	per	 £1 spent7
This	research	productivity	and	inward	investment	are	founded	on	the	availability	of	internationally	competitive,	high-quality	infrastructure.	Access	to	world-leading	infrastructures	supports	research	and	innovation	activity	at	all	scales,	from	individual investigators to large multinational collaborations.	They	act	as	a	magnet	to	international	talent	and	users,	contribute	to	local	and	national	economies,	and	generate	knowledge	and	capability	critical	to	UK	policy,	security	and	wellbeing.	Many	link	to	the	development	of	key	sectors	of	the	economy,	
  The	ISIS	Neutron	and	Muon	source	is	expected	to	deliver	£1.4	billion	of	net	economic	benefit	based	on	its	work	to	2014,	with	a	further	£1.4	billion	of	economic	benefit	predicted	up	to	20308
  Estimates	suggest	the	Babraham	Research	Campus	(supporting	early-stage	bioscience)	has	helped	create	6,673	high	value	jobs	and	generated	£298	million	of	value	for	the	UK9
9
[Page #13]
Case StudiesDelivering the Industrial Strategy Grand Challenges
AI and DATAUsing machine learning and statistical methodology to reduce the impact of  air pollution 
Poor	air	quality	in	cities	poses	a	significant	threat	to	health	and	life	expectancy.	In	London,	it	is	estimated	that	more	than	9,000	Londoners	die	prematurely	each	year	due	to	air	pollution.	Researchers	from	The	Alan	Turing	Institute,	in	collaboration	with	the	University	of	Warwick,	are	working	with	the	Greater	London	Authority	to	develop	machine	learning	algorithms,	data	science	platforms	and	statistical	methodology	to	better	integrate	and	analyse	sensor	data	on	air	pollutants.	As	part	of	navigation	specialists	Waze’s	Connected	Citizens	Program,	the	project	can	access	real-time	traffic	data	which,	in	conjunction	with	Transport	for	London	(TfL)	data,	allows	for	a	more	accurate	picture	of	levels	of	pollution	across	London.	This	research	is	being	used	to	develop	a	mobile-friendly	application	programming	interface	that	will	provide	rolling	hyper-local	forecasts	of	air	pollution	across	London	up	to	forty-eight	hours	ahead	of	time.	
yabaxPsnairettikSretePdnayduR
i
AGEING SOCIETY Age UK use Understanding Society  study to create an Index of Wellbeing in Later Life 
Understanding	Society	study,	the	largest	longitudinal	household	study	of	its	kind,	to	create	an	Index	of	Wellbeing	in	Later	Life.	The	index	uses	more	than	200	possible	wellbeing	indicators	and	assigns	weightings	to	signify	their	importance.	Local	branches	of	Age	UK	are	using	insights	from	the	study	to	plan	how	to	target	their	support	services	at	people	at	risk	 of	experiencing	a	low	level	of	wellbeing.
Age	UK	aims	to	measure	the	wellbeing	of	older	people	in	the	UK	but,	in	the	past,	there	was	no	single	and	coherent	measure	available.	Researchers	therefore	used	data	from	the	
10
[Page #14]
FUTURE of MOBILITY Testing driverless cars at UKAEA’s state-of-the-art robotics technology centre 
The	UK	Atomic	Energy	Authority’s	(UKAEA’s)	Remote	Applications	in	Challenging	Environments	(RACE)	facility	is	being	used	to	test	development	of	autonomous	vehicles.	Users	include	the	DRIVEN	consortium,	who	have	used	the	site	to	carry	out	development	work	ahead	of	public	demonstrations	of	autonomous	vehicle	technology	in	London	and	Oxford.	The	RACE	facility	provides	a	10km	test	track	of	roads,	junctions	and	roundabouts	(complete	with	traffic	lights	and	pedestrian	crossings)	to	test	the	vehicles’	ability	to	monitor	and	react	to	other	vehicles,	cyclists	and	people	in	realistic	circumstances.	The	site	will	also	include	a	dedicated	4G	connection	for	autonomous	vehicles	operating	onsite,	electric	vehicle	charging,	vehicle	storage	and	drive-in	autonomous	vehicle	pit	lanes.	The	open-access	facility	is	being	delivered	in	partnership	with	Millbrook	Proving	Ground	(part	of	the	Spectris	plc	Group).	The	DRIVEN	consortium	is	led	
by	Oxbotica	Ltd	and	includes	AXA	XL,	Cicero	Group,	the	Oxford	Robotics	Institute,	Nominet,	Oxfordshire	County	Council,	Telefonica,	TfL,	the	Transport	Research	Laboratory	and	UKAEA.	
CLEAN GROWTHWorld’s first green energy storage demonstrator to deliver carbon-free power 
and	is	part	of	the	Innovate	UK	Decoupled	Green	Energy	project,	funded	with	£1	million	from	UK	Research	and	Innovation	and	approximately	£500k	from	Siemens.
The	world’s	first	green	energy	storage	demonstrator	is	now	live	in	the	UK	and	features	carbon-free	fuel	that	can	be	stored	or	transported	for	later	use.	The	project	is	a	collaborative	effort	between	Siemens,	STFC,	Oxford	University	and	the	University	of	Cardiff	
On-site	energy	storage	is	becoming	increasingly	attractive	to	organisations	as	there	are	times	when	the	UK	electricity	grid	is	unable	to	accept	all	the	wind	power	being	generated	across	the	nation.	This	means	either	the	wind	turbines	are	turned	off	or	the	electricity	is	used	on	site	or	stored.	However,	carbon-free	chemical	energy	storage	–	including	ammonia	–	has	the	potential	to	work	alongside	other	storage	methods	and	increase	the	infiltration	of	renewable	power	into	our	energy	systems.	The	demonstrator	project	offers	a	way	to	decouple	the	supply	of	electricity	from	demand.	It	uses	renewable	electricity	to	obtain	hydrogen	from	water	via	electrolysis,	and	nitrogen	via	air	separation,	to	power	the	Haber-Bosch	process	to	make	ammonia.	Ammonia	produced	in	this	way	can	be	a	completely	carbon-free	and	practical	bulk	energy	source.	This	demonstrator	has	proven	that	ammonia	is	a	viable	option	and	can	help	reduce	carbon	emissions	from	existing	industrial	processes,	as	well	as	provide	a	means	for	transporting	and	storing	carbon-free	energy	in	bulk.
11
[Page #15]
500
Over               nationally and internationally significant infrastructures
10%
16%
92%
6%
A breadth of expertise:work across more than one topic domain 
26%
13%
Three quarters work with UK business and                   with public policy 42%organisations
29%
Biological sciences, health and food
Energy
Infrastructures employ just 25,000under
Physical sciences and engineering
Environment
staff
Social sciences, arts and humanities
Computational and e-infrastructure
Figure	4.	The	UK’s	extensive	and	diverse	research	and	innovation	infrastructure	landscape.
The	UK	research	and	innovation	infrastructure	landscape	is	extremely	diverse,	from	large-scale	physical	research	facilities	such	as	synchrotrons,	research	ships	and	scientific	satellites,	to	networks	of	imaging	technologies	and	knowledge-based	resources	such	as	scientific,	cultural	or	artistic	collections,	archives,	scientific	data	and	computing	systems,	and	research	cohorts	based	on	the	participation	of	dedicated	volunteers	(Figure	4).	
and	78%	over	fifteen	years.	The	path	to	2.4%	requires	increased	investment	in	the	people	and	infrastructure	needed	to	undertake	R&D	successfully.	To	deliver	the	2.4%	target,	R&D	investment	in	the	UK	will	need	to	increase	to	around	£70	billion	in	2027,	doubling	in	nominal	terms13.	This	is	in	line	with	other	countries’	ambitions	to	grow	investment	in	R&D.	The	vast	majority	of	countries	have	experienced	increasing	R&D	intensity	since	2000.	For	example,	Germany’s	R&D	expenditure	financed	by government and domestic businesses was,	respectively,	35%	and	47%	higher	in	2016	compared	to	200019.	It	is	now	seeking	to	drive	its	R&D	intensity	to	3.5%	of	GDP	by	2025.	China	has	a	target	to	reach	2.5%	R&D	investment	by	202020 and	France	has	a	3%	target21.	The	US	federal	budget	for	research	saw	a	notable	increase	in	2018/19,	representing	the	largest	increase	in a decade22.	The	UK	has	a	strong	tradition	of	international	collaboration	and	partnership	and	the	proportion	of	UK	research	articles	with	an	international	partner	doubled	between	2000	and	201713.	It	is	vital	this	continues	with	opportunities to build on our international partnerships	in	future	years.	
Between	2015/16	and	2020/21,	BEIS	and	UK	Research	and	Innovation	have	committed	to	spend	over	£7.5	billion	of	capital	funding	on	research	and	innovation	infrastructureii. Additional public investment is also provided through	other	government	departments	and	agencies,	the	devolved	nations,	local	authorities	and European programmes. 
Planning	for	infrastructure	requires	consideration	and	anticipation	of	critical	research	and	innovation	requirements	often	decades	ahead	of	actual	use.	In	our	Landscape	Analysis18,	60%	of	infrastructures	have	an	expected	duration	of	over	twenty-five	years	
ii.	This	includes	allocations	through	the	Science	Capital	Ringfence	and	to	Innovate	UK’s	Catapults	programme.
12
[Page #16]
Alongside	these	ambitions	for	growth,	the	changing	economic	context	and	new	technologies	and	practices	are	transforming	the	way	research	and	innovation	is	undertaken.	The	world	is	on	the	cusp	of	a	‘fourth	industrial	revolution’,	with	developments	in	‘big	data’,	digitisation,	synthetic	biology	and	AI	driving	a	change	in	the	nature	of	the	economy.	Venture	capital	investment	in	the	UK’s	growing	AI	sector	leapt	almost	sixfold	from	2014	to	2018,	with	funding	amounting	to	almost	as	much	as	that	in	the	rest	of	Europe	combined	and	investment	in	UK	AI	start-ups	reached	US$1.3	billion	in	201812. The	‘lab	of	the	future’	could	look	and	feel	very	different	to	today	as	the	challenge	of	increasing	volumes	of	data	and	the	opportunities	from	AI	and	machine	learning	impact	across	all	disciplines and sectors. 
collections provides resources to new users and	the	explosion	in	the	use	of	social	media	and	greater	opportunities	for	citizen	science	are	opening up new ways to design and conduct research.	Underpinning	technologies	and	techniques	are	increasingly	relevant	across	disciplines	with	opportunities	to	share	expertise	and	capability	(Figure	5)	and	the	recent	Science	Horizons	Surveyiii	demonstrates	the	importance	of	frontier	techniques	in	measurement	and	imaging,	sensors	and	screening	and	modelling	and	simulation.	New	business	models	are	leading	to	greater	outsourcing	of	R&D	to	specialist	R&D	services	and	innovative	SMEs	alongside	a	blurring	of	the	divide	between	services	and	manufacturing13. 
The	pace	of	this	change	is	increasing,	driving	interactions	that	are	more	complex	and	challenging	the	way	researchers	and	innovators	work	and	the	skills	they	need14.	There	is	an	opportunity	to	create	step-changes	in	our	understanding	of	the	world	around	us,	to	integrate understanding across disciplines in new	ways	and	to	develop	new	partnerships	and	business	opportunities.	Our	future	research	and	innovation	infrastructure	needs	to	play	a	part	in	driving	and	responding	to	these	changes.		
The	UK	has	considerable	strengths	in	‘big	data’	science	and	a	wealth	of	data	assets	and	infrastructure.	‘Digital	twinning’	and	enhanced	modelling and simulation capability alongside experimentation	in	the	real-world	improves	our	ability	to	test	and	validate	new	ideas,	products	and	processes	at	scale.	Adopting	the	principles	of	open	discovery	brings	new	ways	of	sharing	and	debating	research,	digitising	museum	
Robotics&automation
Sensor
Storage
I
Reliable
Data
Advancedmaterials
Longitudnal
Techniques such as Cryo-Electron Microscopy, X-ray Computed Tomography and Magnetic Resonance Imaging can be used across the Arts, Social, Biological, Medical and Physical Sciences to visualise and correlate molecules and their structures improving diagnostic capabilities and increasing our understanding of the building blocks of our world.
Research allows development of Unmanned Underwater Vehicles or semi-autonomous ships for use in Environmental research, enabling R&D in dangerous radioactive environments within the Energy sector, and helps develop robotic prosthetics for use in Medical Sciences.
Innovation, such as miniaturisation, improves our ability to capture high-temporal and spatial resolution data about our environment in remote and inaccessible environments, and develop diagnostic technologies in Precision Medicine.
A necessary component of many infrastructures where processing, safe storage and easy access to objects and artefacts, from ice-cores and geological samples for the study of the past environment, through to collections and text corpora for the study of history, languages, material culture and heritage.  There are significant challenges in preserving the integrity of these collections to ensure that they remain available and accessible to researchers.
Storage of big data sets generated by infrastructures across all research domains reflects the increased volume of data collected through observations, modelling and simulation. For instance, adequate data storage is required to improve forecasting of natural hazards and deliver robust scenarios of future climate change within the Environmental sciences.
Developments are essential for processing and analysing large volumes of data generated by infrastructures across all disciplines. Alongside this, research into AI & Machine Learning technologies to automate and link technologies, integrate diverse data types and correlate data analyses is key within the Arts and Humanities sector and to develop the 'labs of the future' within the Biological and Medical sector.
Research is critical to many sectors. In the Energy sector, ground-breaking research in developing highly efficient and low-cost solar cells, strong lightweight composites for turbine blades, and battery materials for electric and hybrid vehicles will help revolutionise the renewable, energy, aerospace and automotive industries.
Longitudinal datasets such as cohort studies, provide comprehensive data on people at different stages of their lives and have applications across Biological, Medical, Social and Environmental Sciences generating insights into responses to environmental change, demographic change, changing social attitudes and lifestyle factors shaping human health and disease.
magng&characterisation
i
analysis&soft
technologies
of
and
i
physical
secure
datasets
collections
ware
data
storage
Figure	5.	Common	underpinning	technologies	and	techniques	identified	through	programme	consultations.
iii  Royal	Society	of	Chemistry,	Science	Horizons	research	report:	Leading-edge	science	for	sustainable	prosperity	over	the	next	10-15	years,	2019
13
[Page #17]
Chapter 2: Purpose of the Infrastructure Roadmap Programme
14
[Page #18]
Many OECD countries develop research infrastructure roadmaps as tools to support strategic planning23. The UK has also undertaken similar exercises in recent years 24,25,26,27,28, taking an active part in the ESFRI prioritisation process for pan-European infrastructures29. However, the need to update and broaden our understanding of both current capability and future needs has been raised by both the House of Lords Science and Technology Select Committee30 and the National Audit Office. UK Research and Innovation has undertaken an eighteen month exercise to produce this report and parallel Landscape Analysis18. This report provides an assessment of the future research and innovation infrastructure landscape. It identifies opportunities to create a step-change in the next-generation of infrastructure capability and options for resulting investment, and is intended to guide decision-making and identification of priorities to 2030.
other tools that are essential to achieve excellence in research and innovation.’
2.1 Programme objectivesThe	objective	of	the	UK	Research	and	Innovation	infrastructure	roadmap	programme	is	to	create	a	long-term	(until	approximately	2030)	research	and	innovation	infrastructure	roadmap	based	on	an	understanding	of	existing	UK	infrastructure	(and	key	international	facilities	in	which	the	UK	participates),	future	needs	(research,	economic	and	social)	and	resulting	investment	priorities.	In	addition,	the	programme	will	seek	to:
There	is	currently	no	commonly	accepted	definition	of	‘innovation	infrastructure’	so	for	this	programme	we	have	focused	on	‘facilities and assets that enable the development, demonstration and delivery of innovative (new to market) products, services or processes in business, public services, or non-profit sectors’.	This	includes	infrastructure	aimed primarily at industry and set up explicitly to	foster	and	commercialise	innovation,	such	as	the	Catapult	Centres,	Innovation	and	Knowledge	Centres,	Centres	for	Agricultural	Innovation	and	Innovation	Centres	in	Scotland.	It	also	recognises	the	wider	role	of	infrastructure	where	academic	researchers	and	businesses	collaborate	and	of	innovation-	focused	activities	based	within	universities,	PSREs	or	research	and	innovation campuses.
  Identify	future	research	and	innovation	
capability priorities
  Identify	opportunities	for	increasing	inter-
connectivity
  Support	development	of	UK	Research	and	
Innovation’s	overall	long-term	investment	plan  Promote	the	UK	as	a	global	leader	in	research	
and innovation
  Set	out	the	major	steps	needed	to	reach	the	long-term	vision	as	part	of	wider	work	to	achieve	the	government’s	ambition	to	invest	2.4%	of	GDP	invested	in	R&D	by	2027
As	with	similar	exercises	undertaken	in	other	countries,	we	are	focusing	on	international	 and	national-level	activities	that	are	open	to	a	wide	range	of	users	to	undertake	excellent	research	and	innovation.	We	are	not	seeking	to	capture	or	explore	regional	or	local	needs	for	infrastructure	but	recognise	the	importance	of	underpinning	investment	in	smaller	and	mid-range	facilities	within	universities	and	PSREs.	Often	funded	through	core	capital	budgets,	institutions	or	project	specific	grants,	such	equipment	and	facilities	provide	the	essential	tools	and	fundamentals	of	a	‘well-found’	research	establishment.	Further	details	of	 scope	and	definition	are	set	out	in	the	Landscape	Analysis32.
2.2 Scope and definition of research  and innovation infrastructureThe	term	‘research	and	innovation	infrastructure’	can	be	interpreted	in	many	different	ways.	For	the	first	UK	programme	of	this	scale	we	have	adapted	the	definition	used	by	similiar	international	exercises	and	those	in	many	other	countries to also include innovation31:	
‘Facilities, resources and services that are used by the research and innovation communities to conduct research and foster innovation in their fields. They include: major scientific equipment (or sets of instruments), knowledge-based resources such as collections, archives and scientific data, e-infrastructures, such as data and computing systems and communication networks, and any 
We	have	also	focused	on	infrastructure	funded	largely	through	public	sector	research	and	innovation	funders.	This	means	we	have	not	
15
[Page #19]
sought	to	capture	capability	funded	solely	through	private	or	charitable	means.	However,	we	recognise	that	partnership	with	the	charity	sector,	and	shared	facilities	with	industry	and	public	services	such	as	the	National	Health	Service	(NHS),	are	also	vital	to	the	UK	and	many	existing	collaborations	and	partnerships	already	draw	on	this	capability.	For	example,	much	clinical	research	and	translation	is	reliant	on	the	National	Institute	for	Health	Research	(NIHR;	England)	funding	for	research	capacity,	NHS	staff	time	and	facilities.	Future	editions	of	this	report	could	develop	these	areas	further.
However,	few	infrastructures	support	a	single	sector	even	when	using	definitions	as	broad	as	these	and	we	recognise	that	many	infrastructures	are	multidisciplinary	or	interdisciplinary.	This	is	described	in	more	detail	in	the	Landscape	Analysis18.
2.3 Developing this report Figure	6	summarises	the	process	used	to	develop	the	report.	This	included:	analysis	of	the	current	UK	research	and	innovation	infrastructure	landscape	drawing	on	over	900	questionnaire responses32;	reviewing	existing	literature	and	roadmaps	within	subject	areas;	a	series	of	interviews	and	over	thirty-five	dedicated	workshops	and	meetings	involving	over	800	experts;	alongside	advice	from	UK	Research	and	Innovation’s	existing	advisory	networks,	including	UK	Research	and	Innovation	Councils,	strategic	boards	and	committees,	and	insights	from	parallel	work	to	develop	the	UK	Research	and	Innovation	2.4%	roadmap13 and Delivery Plans33.	Our	initial	findings	were	published	in a Progress Report34	which	we	used	to	test	emerging	ideas	and	elicit	further	feedback,	challenge	and	discussion	before	compiling	 this	report.
The	work	in	this	programme	has	been	structured	under	the	broad	sectors	used	by	the	European	Strategy	Forum	on	Research	Infrastructures	(ESFRI)	to	support	alignment	of	activities.	 These	are:
  Biological	sciences,	health	and	food  Energy  Environment  Physical	sciences	and	engineering  Social	sciences,	arts	and	humanities  Computational	and	e-infrastructure
Testing and refining through advisory networks, further workshops and interviews
Consultation with advisory networks, workshops and interviews
This report, supporting Landscape Analysis and portal
Further work tocontinue analysisand reflect feedbackUpdate landscapeanalysis
Progress Report andInterim Analysispublished
Future needs andopportunitiesLandscape analysis
Scope and plan
Gap filling data onexisting infrastructure
Questionnaires toexisting infrastructures
18 months
Figure	6.	Developing	this	report.
16
[Page #20]
We	have	benefitted	from	substantial	support	and	input	from	across	academia,	representative	bodies,	learned	societies,	business	networks,	charitable	organisations,	universities,	PSREs,	the	Catapult	network,	government	departments,	funding	bodies,	the	Devolved	Administrations	and	UK	Research	and	Innovation’s	extensive	network	of	advisory	committees.	The	programme	has	also	drawn	on	an	Advisory	Board,	(which	includes	representatives	from	UK	Research	and	Innovation	Councils,	the	Department	for	Business,	Energy	and	Industrial	Strategy	(BEIS),	BEIS-funded	PSREs,	Universities	UK,	the	Association	for	Innovation,	Research	and	Technology	Organisations	(AIRTO),	Devolved	Funders	and	the	Royal	Society.	We	are	also	grateful	for	insights	from	colleagues	responsible	for	the	development	of	roadmaps	in	other	countries	and	from	ESFRI,	and	to	international	representatives	who	participated	in	a	workshop	at	the	2019	Annual	Meeting	of	the	American	Association	for	the	Advancement	of	Science	(AAAS).
2.4 Aim of this reportThis	report	provides	an	assessment	of	the	future	research	and	innovation	infrastructure	landscape	reflecting	the	feedback	received	on	our	Progress	Report	and	further	work	to	develop	options	for	delivering	capability	needs.	The	report	is	intended	as	a	strategic	guide	to	inform	future	national	and	international	investment	decisions	across	different	priority	areas	and,	given	its	breadth,	does	not	attempt	to	explore	each	issue	in	detail.	
In	the	context	of	the	goal	to	reach	at	least	2.4%	of	UK	GDP	invested	in	R&D,	this	report	is	deliberately ambitious and provides an overview of	infrastructure	opportunities	that	could	lead	to	a	step-change	in	the	capability	available	to	researchers	and	innovators	over	the	next	ten	years.	However,	budgets	will	always	be	limited	and	it	is	unlikely	that	we	will	realise	everything	described	here.	This	report	does	not	represent	a	funding	commitment	or	seek	to	prioritise	the	funding	of	particular	infrastructures.	Ultimately,	future	funding	to	develop	existing	infrastructures	
CASE STUDY:  World-leading Antarctic infrastructure has global impact
The	UK	Antarctic	research	stations	operated	by	the	Natural	Environment	Research	Council	(NERC)	British	Antarctic	Survey	represent	the	UK’s	Antarctic	presence	in	line	with	the	Antarctic	Treaty	and	supports	multidisciplinary,	cross-sector	science,	such	as,	innovation	in	engineering	in	extreme	environments.	They	have	consistently	facilitated	excellent	science	with	global	impact,	including	discoveries	such	as	the	hole	in	the	ozone	layer,	plastic	microbeads	at	the	poles,	and	have	improved	projections	of	ice	sheet	change	and	sea	level	rise.	Maintaining	 this	is	vital	for	research	to	better	understand	
how	the	polar	regions	are	changing	in	light	of	natural	and	human-driven	pressures,	building	 a	clearer	picture	of	how	this	impacts	on	our	global climate.
From	2020,	the	UK’s	new	£200	million	polar	research	ship,	RRS	Sir David Attenborough,	will	support	up	to	sixty	scientists	on	board	with	state-of-the-art	laboratories	and	equipment,	including remote and autonomous underwater vehicles.	It	is	the	first	UK	polar	research	vessel	with	a	helipad	and	a	scientific	moon	pool	and	will	operate	in	both	the	Arctic	and	the	Antarctic.
yevruScitcratnAhsitirB
17
[Page #21]
or	create	new	capability	set	out	here	will	be	dependent on strategic investment decisions and	availability	of	funding	from	a	range	of	organisations	including	the	government	and	UK	Research	and	Innovation.
and	we	have	highlighted	where	more	detailed	scoping	work	would	be	beneficial	to	progress	from	an	early-stage	idea	to	a	more	concrete	project.	The	level	of	detail	provided	in	each	of	the	following	chapters	also	reflects	the	nature	of	the	discipline	and	the	way	different	research	and	innovation	communities	work.	For	instance,	some	activity	is	inherently	more	scalable	and	can	be	approached	in	several	ways	while	in	other	areas	options	are	more	defined.	The	development	cycle	also	varies	substantially	across	different	disciplinary	areas,	e.g.	e-infrastructure	development	cycles	of	two	to	five	years	compared	to	the	decadal	planning	cycles	of	large-scale,	multi-sector	facilities.	A	number	of	infrastructure	capabilities	also	fall	into	natural	groupings	which	have	been	indicated	within	the	chapters:	
The	report	is	focused	on	the	strategic	choices	and	step-changes	in	capability	needed	to	support	the	strategic	goals	and	objectives	set	out	in	the	UK	Research	and	Innovation	Delivery Plans33.	These	capability	gains	can	be	achieved	through	provision	of	new	capability,	upgrading	or	evolving	existing	capability,	and	consolidation	or	more	effective	use	of	existing	capability alongside decommissioning activity where	user	needs	have	evolved.	We	have	not	explored	the	maintenance	of	existing	capability	in	depth;	however,	this	is	also	a	vital	part	of	the	infrastructure	landscape	and	the	wider	ambition	to	raise	the	total	R&D	investment	to	at	least	2.4%	of	GDP	by	2027.	The	Delivery	Plans33 provide additional	context	for	these	investments.	
  Themes and subthemes: where	infrastructure	capabilities operate independently but are collectively working towards a common strategic	goal	and	therefore	a	critical	mass	 of	activity	can	greatly	enhance	impact	
To	develop	a	longer-term	perspective	on	UK	infrastructure	requirements	we	have	captured	both	more	developed	ideas	and	areas	which	 are	considered	vital	to	progress,	but	where	 our	understanding	of	what	is	needed	requires	further	exploration:	
  Groups of interdependent activity:	where	
one	or	more	infrastructure	capabilities	are	necessary	to	achieve	subsequent	actions,	 i.e.	it	is	not	possible	to	undertake	project	C	before	projects	A	and	B	have	been	successful
  Stage 1: Our	understanding	of	the	
It	is	well	understood	that	many	infrastructures	work	across	sectors,	rely	on	common	technologies	and	techniques	and	face	common	challenges	regardless	of	their	primary	focus.	Alongside	the	sector-focused	chapters,	we	describe	some	of	the	infrastructure	capabilities	that	are	designed	to	support	interdisciplinary	and	multidisciplinary	activity.	This	includes	e-infrastructure	as	a	critical	underpinning	capability	that	supports	work	across	the	landscape.	We	also	discuss	the	potential	for	greater	connectivity	across	the	landscape	and	address	some	of	the	cross-cutting	needs	that	will	impact	on	all	infrastructure	regardless	of	subject	focus,	model,	operation	or	user	base.
requirement	is	at	an	early-stage	and	detailed	follow-on	work	is	needed	to	develop	an	understanding	of	the	infrastructure	implications.	This	might	take	the	form	of	an	in-depth	roadmapping	exercise	or	community	engagement	through	meetings	or	strategic	calls	for	expressions	of	interest
  Stage 2: The	need	for	infrastructure	is	clear	but	this	could	be	achieved	in	multiple	ways	and a strategic options analysis is required to help	build	a	detailed	case
  Stage 3: The	concept	for	the	infrastructure	requirement	is	clear	and	ready	either	to	progress to implementation or to conduct a pilot,	scoping	or	design	study	which	will	refine	delivery	or	technical	options	and	allow	for	more	informed	decisions	on	whether	or	not	 to	proceed	further
This	report	is	intended	to	be	read	as	a	stand-alone	document.	However,	readers	may	also	refer	to	the	previous	Progress	Report	and	latest	Landscape	Analysis18,	which	set	out	a	more	 in-depth	description	of	the	strategic	context	 and	current	landscape	in	each	sector.	
This	reflects	our	intention	to	build	a	pipeline	of	ideas	and	infrastructure	requirements	for	the	longer	term.	This	inevitably	means	some	capabilities	are	more	developed	than	others	
18
[Page #22]
Chapter 3: Biological sciences, health and food sector
Gerd Altmann from Pixabay
19
[Page #23]
Advancing our understanding of living organisms, from microbes to humans, is at the heart of this sector – from their molecular and structural complexity, their connections, adaptations and diseases, to their interactions with the changing environment. Such research drives innovation in agriculture and food production, strengthens our ability to identify and treat illness and ensures the UK can respond to some of the biggest challenges of the twenty-first century. Whether centralised or distributed in nature, infrastructure in this sector supports UK competitiveness in major, globally mobile and rapidly changing industry sectors from pharmaceuticals through to agricultural technology. 
The	biological	and	medical	sciences	are	poised	The	biological	and	medical	sciences	are	poised	for	major	advances	using	new	technologies	which,	when	integrated	and	supported	with	excellent	informatics	and	analytics,	can	reveal	how	the	myriad	of	interactions	between	biological molecules and across cells and tissues	combine	to	make	life,	and	how	they	can	be	changed	and	manipulated	to	improve	health	and	productivity.	These	new	technologies	generate	data	on	much	larger	scales	and	over	longer	time	periods	than	previously	possible	and	often	require	the	use	of	AI	approaches	(e.g.	machine	and	deep	learning)	to	unravel	
this	progressively	data-rich	environment.	This	combination	of	‘big	data’	and	AI	is	enabling	the	life	sciences	to	link	genome	and	phenome	to	wider	environmental	and	physical	data,	opening	up	possibilities	for	truly	ground-breaking	research	in	areas	such	as	dynamic	reconstruction and predictive modelling. At the	same	time,	the	sector’s	infrastructure	must	study	life	in	the	places	where	it	happens	–	in	a	forest,	on	a	farm,	in	a	hospital	or	in	the	home.	This	real-world	context	shapes	how	our	infrastructures	are	organised	and	where	they	 are placed. 
CASE STUDY:  Boosting innovation: the Medical Research Council (MRC)/AstraZeneca Cambridge Centre for Lead Discovery
aceneZartsA
Access	to	advanced	technology	helps	to	make	the	process	of	drug	discovery	smarter,	faster	and	cheaper.	The	Centre	for	Lead	Discovery	supports	collaboration	between	researchers	and	industry	scientists	and	access	to	industry	infrastructure	to	advance	discovery	research.	This	collaborative centre supports unprecedented academic	access	to	AstraZeneca’s	chemically	diverse	screening	library	of	over	2	million	compounds,	and	access	to	the	world’s	most	advanced	‘drug	discovery	robot’	(NiCoLA-B),	
which	performs	high-throughput	screening	via	 a	drug	discovery	robotics	platform.	
State-of-the-art	robotics	and	technology	allow	companies	the	ability	to	screen	more	than	300,000	compounds	a	day.	Providing	academic	access	is	helping	MRC	researchers	find	new	biological targets to accelerate potential therapies	from	laboratory	bench	to	patient	bedside and promotes open innovation. 
20
[Page #24]
Research	and	innovation	in	the	biological	sciences,	health	and	food	sector	is	highly	collaborative	and	thrives	on	mutually	beneficial	partnerships	that	are	often	multidisciplinary	in	nature.	This	can	involve	access	to	high-tech	facilities	and	bespoke	computation	and	data	infrastructures,	together	with	the	innovation	space	that	nurtures	the	next-generation	of	UK	companies.	As	part	of	UK	Research	and	Innovation,	the	Biotechnology	and	Biological	Sciences	Research	Council	(BBSRC)	and	Medical	Research	Council	(MRC)	provide	around	half	of	the	national	public	sector	investment	in	life	sciences.	There	are	also	major	contributions	from	the	Department	for	Environment,	Food	 and	Rural	Affairs	(Defra)	and	the	Department	 of	Health	and	Social	Care	including	via	NIHR	and	the	Devolved	Administrations.	In	this	 sector,	research	charities	including	the	Wellcome	Trust	and	the	Gatsby	Charitable	Foundation are major investors and partners  in	developing	infrastructure.	
economy	including	health	services,	research	and	engineering	services,	agriculture,	the	food	industry	and	the	pharmaceutical	industry.	
The	sector	is	well	linked	with	important	international infrastructures and is involved in	six	of	the	thirteen	health	and	food	infrastructures	in	ESFRI.	These	resources	include	biological	data,	physical	biobank	samples,	imaging	facilities	and	molecular	screening	centres,	e.g.	European	Life	Science	Infrastructure	for	Biological	Information	(ELIXIR),	Biobanking	and	Biomolecular	Resources	Research	Infrastructure	(BBMRI)	and	the	European	research	infrastructure	for	imaging	technologies	in	biological	and	biomedical	sciences	(Euro	Bioimaging).	These	infrastructures	are	increasing	efforts	to	join	up	across	Europe,	e.g.	through	Coordinated	Research	Infrastructures	Building	Enduring	 Life-science	Services	(CORBEL)	and	European	Open	Science	Cloud-Life	(EOSC-Life).	
Life	science-based	industries	are	among	the	UK’s	most	important	investors	in	research	and	innovation,	with	high	R&D	investment	and	major	contributions to exports and employment. According	to	the	Office	for	Life	Sciences	2019	report,	the	life	sciences	industry	employs	just	under	250,000	people	and	generates	an	annual	turnover	of	£74	billion35. As well as being important	users	of	infrastructures,	industry	is	key	in	the	co-development	of	new	technologies.	Industry-owned	infrastructure	or	data	resources	are	increasingly	being	shared	with	academia	through	the	development	of	partnerships	(see	case	study).	
Networking distributed regional-scale infrastructures into a national capability is a common	feature	(or	an	aspiration	in	emerging	or	establishing	areas)	in	the	sector,	such	as	networks	of	specialist	microscopy	facilities	 (e.g.	feeder	platforms	for	optimisation),	phenotyping	facilities	or	bioinformatics	resources.	In	some	cases,	a	nationally	significant	network	comprises	the	UK	node	of	a	large-scale	international	infrastructure	partnership	such	as	those	supported	under	ESFRI,	demonstrating	again	that	connectivity	and	partnership	is	at	the	heart	of	the	sector.	
This	sector	also	uses	large-scale, multi-sector facilities such	as	Diamond	Light	Source	(Diamond)	(Chapter	9)	and	is	home	to	a	number	of	internationally	important	reference laboratories addressing global challenges,	e.g.	The	Pirbright	Institute	hosts	the	World	Reference	Laboratory	for	Foot	and	Mouth	Disease	and	the	Francis	Crick	Institute	hosts	one	of	six	World	Health	Organisation	(WHO)	Worldwide	Influenza	Centres	responsible	for	analysing	influenza	viruses	circulating	in	the	human	population.
3.1 Overview of current capabilityThis	sector	covers	all	areas	of	biological	and	medical	science,	from	plant	and	agricultural	science,	to	food	science,	whole-organism	phenotyping,	biomedical	and	clinical	science	and	marine	science	(Figure	7).	Infrastructures	are	key	to	tackling	the	research	and	innovation	challenges	across	the	life	sciences,	whether	these	are	predominantly	purposed	for	this	sector	or	are	multidisciplinary.	Data	from	the	Landscape	Analysis	show	that	most	biological	sciences,	health	and	food	infrastructures	(92%)	report	collaboration	with	other	organisations	either	nationally	or	internationally,	and	the	majority provide resources or services to the	wider	community.	Over	three	quarters	of	infrastructures	in	this	sector	(76%)	engage	with	industry,	benefitting	a	range	of	sectors	of	the	
The	sector	is	increasingly	dependent	on	e-infrastructures. Specialist computational architectures	and	configurations	are	essential	for	making	sense	of	and	managing	the	vast	amounts	of	data	accessible	from	across	the	globe.	UK-based	leadership	in	managing,	integrating	and	analysing valuable data resources and making 
21
[Page #25]
them	accessible	to	millions	of	global	users	puts	us	at	the	forefront	of	new	discoveries	and	at	the	centre	of	a	highly	competitive	world	stage.	Life	science	data	infrastructures	can	extend	across	and	beyond	the	sector	–	for	example,	the	world-leading	European	Bioinformatics	Institute	 (EMBL-EBI)	at	Hinxton;	others	are	targeted	towards	a	specific	challenge	such	as	food	security	(e.g.	the	Earlham	Institute)	and	human	health	(e.g.	Health	Data	Research	UK).
infrastructures	categorised	as	having	a	regional,	national	or	international	scope,	approximately	one	third	reported	their	primary	domain	as	the	biological	sciences,	health	and	food	sector.	Examples	range	in	scale	and	scope	from	single	pieces	of	cutting-edge,	high-cost	equipment	 (e.g.	ultra-high-field	Nuclear	Magnetic	Resonance	(NMR)	for	structural	biology)	to	very	long-term	human	population	cohorts,	and	from	networks	linking	groups	of	cutting-edge	technology	 (e.g.	the	7T	Magnetic	Resonance	Imaging	(MRI)	network)	through	to	field-	and	farm-scale	platforms	which	comprise	a	range	of	in	situ	 state-of-the-art	instrumentation.		
The	Landscape	Analysis18	shows	that	approximately	70%	of	all	UK	infrastructure	report	some	relevance	to	the	life	sciences.	Of	the	
Figure	7.	Biological	sciences,	health	and	food	sector	diversity	and	dependencies.
22
[Page #26]
  High-throughput,	high-fidelity	genomic	sequencing	and	other	‘omics	analysis
3.2 Future directionThe	aspirations	in	the	biological	sciences,	health	and	food	sector	align	well	with	the	government’s	ambitions	to	lead	in	high-impact	technologies	and	align	with	the	directions	set	out	in	the	Life	Sciences	Industrial	Strategy36	and	the	Bioeconomy	Strategy37.	This	sector	also	supports	the	Clean	Growth	Strategy38	through	helping	to	develop	low-carbon	technologies	such	as	the	manufacture	of	bioplastics	from	waste	or	using	precision	agricultural	approaches	to	reduce	the	use	of	pesticides	and	fertilisers.		
  Industrial-scale	chemical	screening	  Automated	multiplex	assays,	alongside	the	use	of	miniature	‘lab-on-a-chip’	platforms	
The	volume,	variety	and	velocity	of	life	science	data	generation	requires	new	capacity,	people	and	methods	to	turn	data	into	knowledge.	It	is	essential	to	improve	the	curation	of	e-data,	to	record	its	provenance	and	to	ensure	that	the	full	value	can	be	extracted	from	it	over	the	coming	years	as	more	sophisticated	methods	and	models	are	developed.	Creating	new	translatable	knowledge	also	requires	a	systems-level	understanding.	Integrating	multiple	complex	biological	data	types	together	with	patient	data,	for	example,	will	aid	the	identification	of	the	molecular	signatures	of	health	and	disease	and	support	precision	approaches	to	early	diagnosis	and	the	development	of	novel	therapeutics.	
This	sector	has	a	diverse	existing	portfolio	of	infrastructure	which	needs	to	be	maintained at appropriate levels of performance and capacity and to evolve	as	technical	advances	are	made	(e.g.	speed,	resolution	and	throughput)	or	as	scientific	questions	necessitate	new	approaches.	Rigorous, regular reviews are an	essential	part	of	ensuring	the	current	infrastructure	remains	relevant	to	the	UK’s	research	and	innovation	landscape.	In	addition	to	research	needs,	the	local	environment	(e.g.	health	service	operational	change,	or	biosecurity)	and	the	need	for	sustainable	productive	partnerships	around	the	facility	should	be	fully	considered	in	funding	decisions	and	organisational	models.	As	with	all	sectors,	resources	to	develop,	adopt	and	uptake	disruptive technologies alongside investment  in	the	infrastructure	itself	are	a	critical	part	of	any	transformation	in	approach.	
Many	of	the	new	approaches	and	scientific	challenges	to	be	addressed	will	require	access to integrated suites of state-of-the-art equipment,	which	are	best	situated	in	dedicated	centres	or	hubs,	with	an	appropriate	ecosystem	of	support	including	specialist	staff.	Networking	these	centres	and	hubs	at	a	national	(or	international)	level	will	give	further	benefits	from	economies	of	scale,	and	through	sharing	knowledge,	methods	and	best	practice.
As	we	move	forward	laboratories	will	increasingly	use	high-tech	robotics	and	the	automation	of	routine	assays	linked	to	data	integration.	High-cost,	cutting-edge	analytical	infrastructure	for	molecular	and	cell	biology	(including	imaging,	‘omics,	cell	culture	and	manipulation),	will	be	linked	with	data	networks	and	new	bioinformatics,	statistics,	computing	and	software	solutions	(including	machine	learning)	to	allow	real-time	data-sharing	across	sites.	This	increasingly automated approach will become	pervasive	across	the	life	sciences	and	early	adopters	are	likely	to	be	in	high-throughput	areas	(e.g.	genomics	and	phenotyping).	This	will	engender	a	change	in	the	dynamics	of	research	work	and	the	research	culture.	
Technological	advances	are	driving	the	biological	and	biomedical	sciences	to	move	from	a reductionist to a holistic understanding of the dynamic biological systems	that	comprise	life.	This	necessitates	looking	across	scales	from	the	atomic	resolution	of	biological	molecules,	to	single-	cells	and	cell	types	in	large	populations,	in	silico	modelling	of	complex	biological	systems	with	high	degrees	of	explanatory	and	predictive	power.	The	field	of	multiscale	biology,	where	the	boundaries	between	scientific	specialisms	are	converging	into	a	new,	highly	multidisciplinary	field,	is	emerging	to	address	this	challenge.
The	increase	in	the	use	of	methods	that	generate	very	high	volumes	of	data	will	continue	into	the	next	decade,	with	experimental	data	coming	from:
Mobile	technologies,	sensors	and	nanotechnology	are	also	expected	to	transform	life	science	research	and	innovation,	taking	it	out	of	the	laboratory	and	into	the	hospital	or	field.	Mobile	technologies	and	remote	biosensors	will	allow	the	creation	of	large	population	cohorts	
  High-resolution	biological	and	medical	
imaging	which	produces	petabytes	of	data
23
[Page #27]
in	their	environmental	context	that	can	be	monitored	remotely	over	long	periods	of	time.	The	use	of	in-field	sensors	and	drones	combined	with	Earth	data	provides	new	opportunities	for	improving	agricultural	productivity	at	the	farm-level	(such	as	by	supporting	improved	farm-level	decisions),	as	well	as	understanding	the	impact	of	agricultural	production	from	the	level	of	an	individual	wheat	grain	to	the	grain	belts	of	Europe,	the	USA	and	beyond.
3.3 Future requirements  and opportunities The	pace	of	progress	in	biological	sciences,	health	and	food	research	is	increasing	with	the	development	of	ever	more	sophisticated	and	powerful	technologies	and	innovations.	This	creates	a	challenge	in	developing	and	refreshing	the	UK’s	biological,	biomedical,	biophysical,	clinical	and	agri-food	research	infrastructure	and	calls	for	strong	partnerships	with	key	stakeholders	and	national-level	public	investment	to	deliver	priority	infrastructure.
Increased	support	for	development	and	application	of	new	life	science	discoveries	and	technologies,	whether	experimental	medicine	therapies	or	more	resilient	and	sustainable	agricultural	practices,	are	essential	to	support	the	health	and	wealth	of	the	UK	population	and	its	economy.	De-risking	and	testing	new	innovations	are	a	key	element	of	translation	and	require	time,	specialist	facilities	(e.g.	clinical	research	centres,	breeding/animal	facilities,	or	farm-platforms)	and	understanding	of	regulatory	requirements.	Developing	infrastructures	to	support	translation	(e.g.	experimental	medicine,	small-scale	manufacturing)	and	to	increase	integration	of	expertise	across	academic,	industrial	and	clinical	research,	NIHR	and	NHS	end-users	will	increase	economic	benefits.	
Within	each	of	the	following	themes	we	present	some	important	opportunities	for	future	infrastructure	capability.	These	themes	have	been	refined	to	reflect	feedback	received	on	the	Progress	Report.	As	described	in	Chapter	2,	these	are	at	different	stages	of	development.	Some	opportunities	need	further	work	to	better	understand	the	requirement,	strategic	importance,	support	within	the	community	and	ability	to	be	delivered,	whilst	others	are	more	developed	and	should	be	implemented	sooner.
E-infrastructure for life sciences
Multiscale biology
1
11
Biological imaging,structural biology and‘omics technologies
Innovation infrastructures
2
10
Biologicalsciences,health andfood sectorthemes
Synthetic biology andindustrial biotechnology
Biosecurity for thelife sciences
9
3
Plant genetics, pathology,phenotyping andagri-technology
Human phenotyping(at depth and scale)
8
4
7
5
Population data forhealth research
Advanced animal genomics,developmental biology andbreeding infrastructures
6
Food safetyand nutrition
Figure	8.	Biological	sciences,	health	and	food	sector	themes	overview.
24
[Page #28]
computational	approaches	(including	machine	learning	and	AI)	allowing	researchers	the	ability	to	be	able	to	‘zoom	in	and	out’	of	molecular,	cellular	and	physiological	events	and	to	gain	insight	into	the	complex	mechanisms	behind	normal	function	and	disease.	This	will	allow	us to move to a more dynamic understanding of	the	interplay	between	biological	pathways,	networks,	spatial	organisation	and	environment	against time and to gain deeper understanding of	biological	function	and	how	it	is	compromised	by	damage	from	environmental	challenges	or	disease	(see	case	study).
Themes 1 & 2: Multiscale biology, biological imaging, structural biology and ‘omics technologiesMultiscale	biology	has	emerged	as	an	exciting	new	area,	including	the	convergence	of	different	approaches	to	empirical	life	science	data-gathering,	data	integration	and	mathematical	modelling.	Complex	biological	data	arising	from	the	latest	technological	developments	in	imaging,	‘omics	technologies	and	structural	biology	across	scales	from	molecules	to	organisms,	and	across	short	and	long	timescales,	will	be	integrated	utilising	
CASE STUDY:  Single-cell technologies
The National Capability in Genomics and Single-Cell Analysis provides	scalable	infrastructure	for	high-throughput	DNA	analysis	of	biological	systems	from	ecosystems	to	individual	cells.	Embedded	in	the	Earlham	Institute’s	data-intensive	research	environment	and	backed	by	one	of	the	largest	High-Performance	Computing	systems	dedicated	to	bioscience	in	Europe,	this	capability	is	uniquely	positioned	to	deliver	the	tools,	resources	and	services	needed	to	tackle	global	issues	through	genome	science.	
genomic	analysis	of	plant	pathogens	during	outbreaks,	such	as	ash	dieback.	
Pioneering	single-cell	technologies	are	also	used	to	improve	the	diagnosis,	stratification	and	treatment	of	human	diseases;	in	parallel,	MRC’s	Clinical	Research	Infrastructure	Initiative	funded	a	family	of	seven	smaller-scale	resources	in	biomedical	centres	from	Exeter	to	Newcastle.	For	example,	the	Oxford	Single-Cell	Consortium	has	access	to	robotics	and	ultra-clean	environments	to	perform	single-cell	experiments.	New	computational	and	statistical	methods	are	used	in	areas	such	as	stem	cell	transplantation,	mechanisms	in	inflammatory	bowel	disease	and	ageing,	at	the	level	of	the	single-cell.	The	consortium	works	with	the	other	centres	across	the	UK	on	new	techniques	and	analytical	methods.	
The	newly	established	single-cell	analysis	facility	extends	the	remit	from	organisms	to	individual	cells	at	a	resolution	not	possible	before.	It	supports	research	in	plants,	microbes	and	animals,	with	a	particular	focus	on	agricultural	science	and	bioscience	for	health.	It	also	plays	a	key	role	in	bio-surveillance	by	providing	rapid	
etutitsn
I
mahlraE
25
[Page #29]
Multiscale	biology	needs	a	distributed	national	infrastructure	which,	as	illustrated	in	Figure	9,	enables	convergence	of	structural biology (e.g.	X-ray	diffraction	and	electron	microscopy), imaging	(e.g.	optical,	photoacoustic,	lasers,	electron	tomography	and	correlative	approaches)	and	multi-‘omics	(e.g.	proteomics,	
metabolomics,	transcriptomics	and	genomics)	coupled	with	high-throughput automation across	scales.	Managing	the	high-dimensional	data	outputs	will	require	the	development	of	increasingly	sophisticated	data integration and modelling methods.
Data integration& Modelling
Structura
l
acgooB
gngam
Boogy
MultiscaleBiology
i
i
i
l
l
i
I
l
‘OmicsTechnologies
Figure	9.	Multiscale	biology	enabled	by	the	convergence	of	imaging,	‘omics	technologies,	structural	biology	and	data analytics.
Alongside	the	longer-term	ambition	of	multiscale	biology,	there	is	the	parallel	need	for	new	biophysical	and	imaging	technologies.	Understanding	how	molecules	function	and	interact	will	be	invaluable	for	broader	advancements	such	as	in:	novel	drug	discovery;	understanding	host-pathogen	interactions	in	plants,	animals	and	humans;	and	combatting	Antimicrobial	Resistance	(AMR).	The	equipment	and	technologies	required	sit	on	a	spectrum	from	those	which	reside	in	well-found	labs	at	a	local	level	through	to	those	which	need	to	be	housed	in	specialist	regional	or	national	centres,	with	appropriate	support	systems,	such	as	the	Rosalind	Franklin	Institute	or	the	electron	 Bio-Imaging	Centre	(eBIC).
research	tools	is	steadily	increasing	with	major	advances	such	as	super-resolution	microscopy,	which	can	break	the	light	diffraction	barrier	at	the	10-20nm	level,	and	atomic	force	microscopy,	which	can	measure	the	mechanical	properties	of	a	sample	at	high	resolution	to	obtain	images	at	the	molecular	scale	in	living	samples.	The	highest	resolution	is	obtained	by	Electron	Microscopy	(cryo-EM)	–	a	technique	that	provides	detail	at	near-atomic	resolution.	
Structural biology: The	UK	is	a	world	leader	in	structural	biology	with	the	MRC	Laboratory	for	Molecular	Biology	(MRC	LMB)	winning	seven	Nobel	Prizes.	The	UK	houses	world-leading	facilities	that	bring	together	the	leading	generation	of	biophysical	technologies	for	structural	biology	and	contribute	to	its	international	reputation	(e.g.	MRC	LMB,	Central	Laser	Facility),	including	key	techniques	such	as	crystallography,	NMR,	cryo-EM	and	mass	spectrometry	and	spectroscopy.	The	requirement	for	improved	mass	spectrometry	is	driven	by	complexity,	but	also	by	the	need	to	analyse	small	samples	(e.g.	micro-dissected	tissue	and	organoids)	and	the	progressive	drive	to	be	able	to	analyse	single-cells	using	mass	spectrometry.
Biological and biomedical imaging: Bioimaging	research	needs	a	diversity	of	specialist	imaging	modalities	including	techniques	that	allow	the	study	of	sub-cellular	processes,	and	intravital	imaging	which	allows	the	study	of	processes	in	living	tissues	(e.g.	3D	cultures	of	cells	including	organoids)	and	animals,	to	non-destructive	imaging	of	whole	organisms	using	X-ray	Computed	Tomography	(CT)	technology	for	high-resolution	3D	images	of	internal	structures	 (e.g.	of	plant	roots	in	situ).	The	power	of	
26
[Page #30]
‘Omics technologies: While	some	areas	are	well	established	with	highly	specified	technologies,	such	as	gene	sequencing,	other	‘omic	approaches	are	less	well	served	and	require	new	technological	advances	to	improve	detection	and	isolation	(e.g.	metabolomics).	The	increasing	need	to	analyse	highly	complex	biological	samples	requires	new	methods	with	improved	detection,	better	identification	and	more	accurate	quantification	of	larger	numbers	of	metabolites.	Proteomics	has	expanded	rapidly,	aided	by	improvements	in	instrumentation,	accuracy	and	sensitivity	in	identification	and	quantification	of	the	thousands	of	proteins	in	a	biological	sample.	These	findings	support	the	analysis	of	cellular	signalling	networks	and	elucidation	of	the	dynamics	of	protein	interactions,	and	provide	insights	into	the	biochemical	state	of	the	relevant	cell	or	tissue.	A	common	challenge	is	
the	assimilation	and	interrogation	of	terabytes	of	information	to	reveal	detailed	phenotypic	and	functional	readouts	of	cells,	tissues	and	organisms.	This	requires	new	software	solutions	and	methodologies	(including	new	AI	tools)	and	the	ability	to	integrate	data	across	imaging	platforms	for	new	correlative	analysis	and	linkage	to	other	data	sets	(e.g.	across	imaging	scales	and	with	transcriptomic	data,	e.g.	in	the	Human	Cell	Atlas)	to	deliver	a	systems-level	understanding.
The	technologies,	analytics	and	mathematical	modelling	require	close	working	with	the	physical	and	engineering,	medical	and	environmental	sciences.	UK	facilities	are	valued	by	industry	as	hubs	of	technology	development,	training	and	expertise	and	have	supported	the	commercialisation	of	technologies	which	are	now used worldwide. 
Theme 1: Multiscale biology
The	ambition	is	to	create	UK-wide	multidisciplinary	capability	spanning	biological	scales	across	human,	animal	and	plant	research,	to	illuminate	biology	in	action	and	put	the	UK	at	the	leading	edge	of	this	emerging	field.	This	infrastructure	will	revolutionise	our	ability	to	view	the	complex	mechanisms	and	interplay	of	intricate	structures	that	make	life	happen	and	integrate	layers	of	multimodal data to understand currently intractable problems.
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Multiscale	biology	centres	and	hubs
A	national	network	of	highly	specialised	centres	of	excellence	would	bring	together	a	broad	range	of	cutting-edge	analytical	technologies	with	robotics,	automation	and	data	analysis	and	support	systems.	These	new	‘labs	of	the	future’	would	deliver	quantitative	analysis	and	scale-up	for	integrative	and	dynamic	biology	across	molecules,	cells	and	tissues	in	plants,	animals	and	humans.	They	may	focus	on:
  Biological	challenges,	e.g.	biological	systems,	human/plant/animal	
disease 
  Technological	challenges,	e.g.	working	at	the	boundaries	of	their	
technologies	or	expertise	and	pushing	methods	development	around	data	integration	in	that	area	
The	centres	would	also	support	some	of	the	development	of	computational	models	and	correlative	analysis	(e.g.	modelling	and	simulation	at	appropriate	levels	of	abstraction).
National	integrative	analytics	platform
Cross-disciplinary	platforms	would	enable	comparative	analyses	across	the	hubs	and	smaller	research	programmes,	including	computational	models,	correlative	analyses,	development	of	innovative	algorithms	and	software	such	as	AI,	data	management	and	data	standards.	This	would	require	access	to	data-intensive	hardware	(e.g.	High-Performance	Computing	(HPC)	or	High-Throughput	Computing	(HTC)),	software	for	processing	and	analytics	and	data	storage	(such	as	hybrid	storage	solutions	allowing	local	processing	and	longer-term	storage).
27
[Page #31]
Theme 2: Biological imaging, structural biology and ‘omics technologies
Biological	imaging,	structural	biology	and	‘omics	technologies	are	key	to	the	multiscale	approach	but	retain	their	own	research	directions	and	discrete	infrastructure	requirements.	At	the	boundaries	of	each	of	these,	there	is	an	intersection	of	approaches	leading	to	some	shared	infrastructure	needs.	Access	to	the	latest	technologies	is	key	for	all	researchers,	but	the	specialist	nature	can	require	them	to	be	provided	via	a	hub	with	appropriate	support	structures.	New	specialised	facilities	are	needed	to	establish	platforms	for	innovation	and	to	enable	the	UK	community	to	participate in large international programmes.
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Networks	of	specialised centres for	advanced	imaging,	structural	biology and ‘omics technologies	
Specialist	centres	would	offer	a	distinctive	package	of	leading	technologies,	supported	by	local	‘feeder’	instruments	and	sample	preparation	capabilities,	collectively	brought	together	into	a	national	network.	These	centres	would	also	have	an	important	role	in	developing	new	technologies	(often	in	partnership	with	industry)	and	then	making	them	more	widely	available.	This	would	provide	access	to	world-leading	expertise	and	approaches,	 e.g.	optimisation	stations	and	correlative	methods.	For	example:
Biological imaging technologies:  High-voltage	transmission	and	scanning	cryo-EM	to	reveal	the	atomic	
structure	of	biomolecules
  Super-resolution	microscopes	that	break	the	light	diffraction	barrier	
to	reveal	the	properties	and	dynamics	of	cells	and	tissues	(e.g.	photoactivated	localisation	microscopy,	stochastic	optical	resolution	microscopy,	stimulated-emission	depletion	microscopy,	3D	structured	illumination	microscopy,	total	internal	reflection	fluorescence	microscopy	and	light	sheet	fluorescence	microscopy)	
  Tomography:	optical	coherence	tomography,	optical	projection	
tomography,	micro	X-ray	CT	and	magnetic	resonance	to	reveal	the	underlying	architecture	of	plants,	animals	or	humans
  Atomic	force	microscopy	
Structural biology technologies:  X-ray	crystallography	and	protein	production
  NMR
  Optical and electron microscopy
  Biophysical	technologies:	absorption	spectrophotometry,	circular	
dichroism,	ionisation	techniques	and	isothermal	titration	calorimetry
  Cellular	EM	Tomography	
  Mass	spectroscopy,	spectrometry
Multi ‘omics technologies	(proteomics,	metabolomics,	transcriptomics,	epi/genomics	and	other	‘omics	approaches):
  Functional	genomics,	next-generation	sequencing	and	platforms,	
expression	profiling	technologies,	whole	exome	and	genome	sequencing,	High-Throughput	Ribonucleic	Acid	(RNA)	expression	profiling
  Mass	spectrometry	for	analyte	detection,	ionisation	technologies,	e.g.	surface-enhanced	laser	desorption/ionisation,	quantitative	electrophoresis,	and	chromatography
  Spectroscopy	for	metabolite	detection	
28
[Page #32]
Image	repositories	and novel data platforms
Novel	data	platforms,	image	repositories	and	‘omics	data	integration:	 at	sufficient	scale	would	support	the	storage,	transfer,	manipulation	 and	interoperability	of	large	data	files	and	collections,	and	provision	for	open access.
UK	partnership	in current and future	international	infrastructures
National	networking	as	preparation	for	any	UK	node(s)	as	part	of	international	coordination	activities,	or	membership	of	relevant	international	consortia,	e.g.	ESFRI,	Euro-BioImaging	and	Global	BioImaging	projects	and	Instruct-ERIC	for	structural	biology.	This	would	facilitate	sharing	of	specialist	infrastructure,	collaboration	opportunities,	training	facilities	and	agreed	protocols	for	data-sharing	and	access.
The	requirement	for	appropriate	surveillance,	outbreak monitoring and analysis and contingency	preparedness	plans	has	been	demonstrated	by	the	recent	Ebola	virus	outbreak	in	West	Africa,	which	killed	large	numbers	of	people	and	cost	external	partners	around	£2.7	billion	to	support	the	world’s	poorest	communities	in	containing	the	outbreak.	The	UK	is	implementing	the	£4.85	million	BRIGIT	programme	to	improve	detection	and	prevent	the	spread	of	the	insect-transmitted	bacterial	plant	pathogen Xylella,	which	infects	500	species	of	crops,	trees	and	ornamental	plants	and	has	had	devastating	effects	across	Europe	after	transmission	from	the	Americas	(e.g.	killing	over	1	million	olive	trees	in	Italy).	In	addition,	there	is	a	need	for	facilities	to	foster	and	translate	technology	developments	into	application,	 e.g.	new	vector	control	methods,	infection	prevention	and	control	approaches,	vaccine	development	and	manufacture,	and	sensor	and	mobile device development. 
Theme 3: Biosecurity for the  life sciences Zoonotic	diseases	(including	vector-borne	diseases),	resistance	to	antimicrobial	compounds	and	infectious	disease	risks	to	human,	animal	and	plant	health	are	substantial	challenges	facing	the	UK39.	They	cause	significant	economic	losses	(e.g.	swine	flu,	foot-and-mouth	disease	virus),	affect	food	security	and	pose	a	serious	threat	to	health	across	the	globe	(e.g.	AMR	to	colistin).	Over	900	pests	and	pathogens	currently	pose	a	threat	to	the	UK’s	arable	crops,	trees,	horticulture	and	wild	plants,	and	zoonoses	represent	at	least	75%	of	emerging	infectious	diseases	in	humans.	Specialist	infrastructures	form	an	essential	part	of	the	UK’s	preparedness	in	the	event	of	disease	outbreak	or	other	attack	by	helping	prevent,	control,	treat	and	eradicate	major	human,	animal	and	plant	diseases.	An	integrated	whole-system	approach	will	be	necessary	and	requires	diverse	infrastructure	including	national	basic	research	and	reference	laboratories,	diagnostic	facilities,	biosafety	level	3	(BSL-3)/category	3	(CAT3)	or	higher	containment	facilities,	infrastructure	for	surveillance,	and	detection	and	prediction	of	animal	and	plant	health	risks	(e.g.	the	UK	Animal	and	Plant	Health	Internet	of	Things	and	the	CropMonitor	Pro	service	from	the	Crop	Health	and	Protection	(CHAP)	Agri-Tech	Centre).	
An	integrated	approach	is	required	to	tackle	these	biosecurity	challenges.	This	would	bring	together	fundamental	biological	and	biomedical	knowledge	with	knowledge	from	animal,	plant,	pathogen	and	vector	genomics,	phenotyping,	epidemiological data and environmental data (e.g.	climate	modelling).
29
[Page #33]
Theme 3: Biosecurity for the life sciences
The	UK	needs	world-leading	infrastructure	to	combat	zoonotic	diseases	(including	vector-borne	diseases),	resistance	to	antimicrobial	compounds	and	infectious	disease	risks	to	health	(human,	animal	and	plant)	globally.	
Internationally	important	infrastructures	enable	research	to	prevent,	control	and	eradicate	major	diseases;	and	to	protect	human	health,	livestock	and	crops:	and	are	vital	to	the	UK’s	preparedness	in	the	event	of	disease	outbreak	or	other	attack.
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
The	Pirbright	Institute	
The	Pirbright	Institute	is	a	critical	national	capability	for	biosecurity	research	and	surveillance	of	livestock	and	zoonotic	diseases.	It	has	global	leadership	in	these	areas	and	is	the	World	Reference	Laboratory	for	Foot	and	Mouth	Disease.	Upgrading	facilities	at	the	institute	would	enhance	capability	and	research	into	important	viral	and	vector-borne	diseases	including:
  Human	pathogens	(e.g.	Zika,	Dengue,	Ebola)
  Transmission	of	diseases	into	new	regions	 
(e.g.	blue	tongue	virus	and	lumpy	skin	disease	virus	into	Europe)
  New	disease	threats	(e.g.	Schmallenberg	virus	for	sheep)
These	new	capabilities	could	include	high-containment	laboratories	and	additional	infrastructures,	including	insectary	facilities,	and	could	look	to	exploit	synergies	with	other	government	surveillance	and	diagnostic	capabilities	for	animal	disease,	e.g.	Defra’s	Animal	and	Plant	Health	Agency at Weybridge.
High-containment	and surveillance facilities
Investment	in	capabilities	at	key	national	centres	would	enhance	expertise	in	research	using	prions	or	human	pathogens	not	contained	by	vaccination	or	resistant	to	treatment	(such	as	Mycobacterium	tuberculosis,	HIV	and	Plasmodium	falciparum,	vivax	(malaria)).	
These	may	comprise	upgrades	to	existing,	or	new	high-containment	and	surveillance	facilities	including	national	and	world	reference	laboratories	(particularly	BSL-3/CAT3	or	higher	containment	levels).	
Infrastructure	is	needed	to	support	development	of	novel	diagnostics,	new	vaccination	technologies	(e.g.	viral	vectors,	nucleic	acid-based	vaccines	and	RNA	vaccines)	and	production	systems	(e.g.	production	of	virus-like	particles	as	vaccines	against	Zika	virus	by	Leaf	Expression	Systems).	This	would	create	a	new	pipeline	to	fight	highly	pathogenic	viruses,	resistant	pathogens	and	other	dangerous	animal	and	human	pathogens.
Facilities	for	diagnostics and vaccine production(also coordinated with government health departments, Defra and the Animal Health and Veterinary Laboratories Agency)
Critical	national	surveillance,	modelling,	analysis	and preparedness(also coordinated with government departments)
Networked	data	infrastructure	would	bring	together	information	from	surveillance	systems,	epidemiological	analyses	and	health	analytics	with	modelling	of	infectious	diseases.	A	national	infrastructure	for	monitoring	and	measuring	plant,	animal	or	human	pathogens	(‘Internet	of	Things’	approach)	using	mobile	measuring	devices	and	sensors,	e.g.	in	fields,	hospitals	or	surgeries,	would	support	the	UK’s	preparedness,	mitigation,	and	response	plans	against	infectious	disease	threats,	in	a	global	context.
30
[Page #34]
studies	on	a	wide	variety	of	diseases	and	public	health	issues	using	UK	Biobank	data.	The	NHS	is	now	developing	a	Genomic	Medicines	Service,	which	builds	on	the	recently	completed	100,000	Genomes	Project;	in	time	this	will	enable	research	and	implementation	to	support	quicker	diagnoses	for	rare	diseases,	more	personalised	treatment	and	interventions,	and	improvements	to	cancer	survival	through	earlier	diagnoses	and	more	effective	use	of	therapies.	
Themes 4 and 5: Human phenotyping (at depth and scale) and population  data for health researchAdvances in multiscale biology and related disciplines	(imaging,	‘omics	and	structural	biology)	hold	great	promise	for	biomedical	and	clinical	science	to	explore	the	spectrum	of	‘wellness	to	illness’.	Developing	detailed	multidimensional	disease	maps	(from	atomic	resolution	to	organ	systems)	will	transform	the	use	of	in	silico	approaches	to	understand	human	biology,	disease	states	and	opportunities	for	diagnosis,	intervention	and	drug	design.	
The	UK	is	internationally	renowned	for	population-based	health	research	and	unique	cohort	studies	have	been	supported	for	over	 a	hundred	years.	The	world’s	longest-studied	birth	cohort,	the	MRC	National	Survey	of	Health	and	Development,	turned	seventy-three	this	year.	By	following	this	population	from	birth,	important	correlations	have	been	identified,	 e.g.	the	heaviest	babies	were	most	at	risk	of	breast	cancer,	children	born	into	lower	social	classes	were	more	likely	to	gain	weight	as	adults	and	women	with	a	higher	IQ	reached	menopause	later	in	life.	As	the	cohort	has	aged,	technology	has	advanced	and	imaging	technology	has	been	used	to	scan	the	hearts,	bones	and	brains	of	participants	and	DNA	samples	have	been	taken,	making	this	cohort	even	more	valuable.	
The	phenotyping	of	large	groups	of	people	(ranging	from	hundreds	of	patients	to	millions	of	volunteers	in	population	studies)	will	be	needed	in	order	to	decipher	the	genetic	basis	of	biology	and disease to robustly analyse disease and pre-disease	states,	and	evaluate	diagnostics	and	treatments	for	precision	medicine.	Next-generation	sequencing,	proteomics	and	metabolomics data will provide granular phenotypic	resolution	for	‘deep	phenotyping’	and	use	sophisticated	algorithms	to	integrate	phenotype	data	with	genomic	variation.	Whereas	‘broad’	phenotyping	at	the	population	scale	will	shed	light	on	disease	heterogeneity	and	variable	response	to	treatment.	Biomedical	imaging	technologies	will	support	both	the	study	of	fundamental	questions	around	disease	processes	at	sub-cellular	levels	and	the	development	of	clinical	tools	for	diagnosis	and	patient	care.	Other	new	technologies	offer	better	information	(e.g.	functional	Magnetic	Resonance	Imaging	(fMRI)	to	detect	and	map	neural	activity	in	the	brain)	with	higher	resolution	or	over	a	shorter	time	and	allow	new	approaches	to	progress	to	clinical	uses	(e.g.	using	fMRI	to	differentiate	sub-classes	of	neuropsychiatric	disorders	or	to	guide	surgical	procedures).	
Exploiting	historical,	current	and	future	population-based	data	will	require	convergent	approaches	across	the	bio/social	and	health	field.	As	NHS	data	will	remain	inside	the	NHS,	it will be essential to develop routes to support the	analysis	and	linkage	of	complex	health	data.	The	ability	to	create	links	across	social,	economic	and	other	routine	administrative	data	is	key	to	understanding	public	health	issues,	as	is	ensuring	that	the	public	retain	trust	in	research	through	joint	dialogue,	understanding	consent	and	the	safeguards	around	the	bona	fide	use	of	data.	A	broad	strategy	should	support	the	assembly,	analysis,	curation	and	linkage	of	cohorts	and	other	data	sources,	as	well	as	embrace	new	approaches	to	data-gathering	for	large-scale	population	studies.	This	should	develop	more	economic	methods	for	the	design	and	analysis	of	population	cohorts,	including	taking	advantage	of	the	convergence	of	mobile	technologies,	wearable	sensors	and	sensitive	technologies	for	measuring	biological	samples.	This	will	enable	more	individualised	lifestyle	and	decision-making	to	be	possible	within	the	population,	and	consideration	of	the	health,	social	and	economic	benefits.	
UK	Biobank	was	launched	in	2006	and	is	one	of	the	most	important	resources	for	population	health	in	the	world.	This	vast	infrastructure	contains	genomic	and	biomedical	data	from	half	a	million	individuals	in	the	UK	who	have	been	followed	for	ten	years.	In	March	2019,	UK	Biobank	released	new	genetic	data,	containing	exome	sequence	data	of	50,000	participants	linked	to	detailed	health	and	biomedical	imaging	data.	This	will	allow	researchers	developing	new	treatments	to	understand	genetic	differences	across	the	population	and	how	these	might	impact	on	treatment	success.	Over	750	institutions	around	the	world	have	published	
31
[Page #35]
The	MRC	strategic	review	of	cohorts40 highlighted	the	paucity	of	studies	with	large-scale,	deep	phenotyping	data	and	a	limited	number	of	studies	that	provided	a	detailed	focus	on	the	‘transition	to	adulthood’.	Access	to	a	broad,	deeply	phenotyped,	frequently	sampled,	large	population-based	cohort	would	
provide	a	competitive	advantage	to	the	UK	in	driving	precision	medicine,	AI	approaches	and	digital	pathology.	Similarly,	a	timely	focus	on	the	transition	to	adulthood	would	also	reveal	insights	and	impacts	on	the	lives	of	children	 who	are	growing	up	in	the	‘age	of	austerity’	 and	through	the	social	media	revolution.
CASE STUDY:  Working with the NHS to accelerate translational research
The	NIHR	BioResource	is	a	network	of	over	130,000	volunteers	who	have	agreed	to	take	part	in	health	research.	Patients	with	common	and	rare	diseases	and	volunteers	from	the	general	public	are	asked	to	take	part	based	on	their	genotype	and/or	phenotype.	This	allows	the	BioResource	to	build	cohorts	in	selected	disease	areas	and	help	recruit	patients	to	clinical	studies	with	the	support	of	the	NIHR	Clinical	Research	Network.	
Inflammatory	Bowel	Disease	(IBD)	is	one	disease	area	where	having	access	to	human	samples	 and	volunteers	is	pushing	our	understanding	of	a	multifaceted	and	debilitating	condition.	IBD	is	a	complex	condition	with	many	subtypes	of	disease	(endotypes)	resulting	from	a	range	of	biologically	distinct	disease	processes.	Currently	IBD	is	not	curable	(except	through	radical	surgery).	The	IBD	BioResource	established	in	2016	interfaces	across	the	MRC	and	NIHR	to	provide	access	to	patient	samples	to	accelerate	the	clinical	translation	of	genetics	research	in	Crohn’s	disease	and	Ulcerative	Colitis	(collectively	IBD).	So	far	23,000	patients	have	provided	samples	which	researchers	use	in	genetic	analysis	studies,	e.g.	looking	at	the	effect	of	genetic	variants	that	increase	susceptibility	to	Crohn’s	disease.	
A	smaller	group	of	1000	newly	diagnosed	patients	is	currently	being	recruited	to	provide	a	more	detailed	set	of	samples	for	‘deep	phenotyping’.	This	cohort	will	offer	greater	insights	into	disease	mechanisms	by	undertaking	transcriptomic,	meta-genomic,	metabolomic	and	proteomic	studies.	 This	will	allow	researchers	to	hunt	for	the	molecular	signatures	of	disease.	These	signatures	may	form	the	basis	of	new	clinical	studies	to	validate	findings	and	test	potential	therapies.	Ideally	this	 will	lead	to	new	therapeutics	and	drugs	to	manage	or	cure	this	debilitating	condition.
32
[Page #36]
Theme 4: Human phenotyping (at depth and scale)
Developing	the	UK’s	biomedical	and	clinical	research	infrastructure	to	analyse	human	phenotypes	with	high	precision	and	at	scale,	with	consistent	technology	and	data	integration	across	sites,	greater	lab	automation	and	advanced	analytics	and	AI	approaches.
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Clinical	 phenotyping	hubs	(technology-led)
Supporting	industry,	academic	and	NHS	programmes	and	cooperation	with	coordinated	phenotyping	hubs,	including	primary	data-gathering	at	scale	and	utilising	bespoke	and	unique	facilities,	would	deliver	efficient	services	across	multiple	projects	and	clinical	areas	building	on	£170	million	of	investment	in	clinical	infrastructure	made	in	2015.	
For academic, industry and health users, coordinated with government health departments
Hubs	would	provide	a	balance	of:	  Standard	core	facilities	(next-generation	sequencing,	proteomics	and	metabolomics	data)	on	at	least	eight	clinical	research	campuses	to	enable	phenotyping	at	scale	and	to	support	fast	recruitment	to	 complex studies
  Specialist	facilities:	a	broad	range	of	leading	capabilities	(e.g.	
biomedical	imaging	–	MRI,	Positron	Emission	Tomography	(PET),	CT;	multi-‘omics;	wearables	and	home	systems	for	24/7	monitoring;	robot	sample	handling	and	banking;	physiological	monitoring)	which	can	be	used	in	conjunction	with	the	core	facilities
  Integration	facilities	working	with	data	outputs	from	standard	and	specialist	facilities	to	support	data	integration	and	mathematical	modelling	and	linkage	through	consistent	data	systems	and	standards,	with	standard	user	access	and	agreements
Network	of	 flagship	centres	(challenge-led)
State-of-the-art	technology	would	support	research	into	fundamental	challenge	areas,	e.g.	disease	or	system-based.	Provision	of	specialist	facilities	could	explore	areas	such	as:
  Multimodal	neuroscience	and	cognitive	studies	for	medical	and	normal	
Coordinated with government health departments
function	research,	e.g.	for	brain	repair	and	rehabilitation,	or	mental	health	research	–	exploiting	MRI,	PET	with	electrophysiological	data	and	other	modalities
  Development	of	novel	technologies,	e.g.	high-field	(11–14T)	MRI	to	
develop advanced diagnostic imaging capabilities
33
[Page #37]
Theme 5: Population data for health research
Providing	new,	modern	population	cohorts	to	address	major	knowledge	gaps	–	embracing	advances	in	technology	and	data	linkage	to	achieve	world-class	longitudinal	studies	with	richer	data,	more	efficiently.
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Population	cohort	for	accelerated disease detection
Establishing	the	Accelerating	Detection	of	Disease	programme,	a	globally	unique	cohort	of	up	to	5	million	volunteers	(approximately	1	million	surveyed	annually)	with	biomedical	samples	and	analyses	would	allow	research,	development	and	evaluation	of	methods	for	detection	of	earlier	disease	stages	and	prevention/early	intervention.	
For academic, industry, health, public and social health users, coordinated with government health departments
A	broad,	deeply	phenotyped,	frequently	sampled,	large	population-based	cohort	would	drive	precision	medicine,	development	of	AI	approaches	and	digital	pathology.	
Access	to	a	large	data	set	could	increase	the	sensitivity	of	the	detection	of	nascent	and	subtle	alterations	in	molecular	markers	or	morphology,	helping	to	identify	the	early	predictors	of	diseases	and	inform	potential	treatments	for	the	6,000–8,000	rare	diseases	that	affect	a	few	hundred	people worldwide.
Scoping	work	would	inform	any	decision	on	next	steps.
Adolescent	cohort
The	transition	to	adulthood	is	a	key	life	phase.	A	national-level,	longitudinal	cohort	focused	on	adolescence	would	address	a	key	gap	in	coverage	in	the	UK’s	available	cohort	studies.	It	would	support	fundamental	medical,	psychological	and	social	research	addressing	key	stages	of	personal,	physiological	and	neurological	development	with	major	impacts	for	mental	health,	physical	health,	nutrition,	obesity	and	later	life	choices.	Scoping	and	piloting	of	potential	approaches	would	inform	any	decision	on	next	steps.
For academic, health, public and social health users, coordinated with government health departments and education departments
National	platforms	for	population studies
A	national-level	strategy	is	required	to	determine	the	most	appropriate	infrastructure(s)	to:
  Preserve	and	support	the	UK’s	unique	population	cohort	data	assets,	providing	a	dynamic	interface	to	create	standards,	data	curation,	data	linkage	and	interoperability	across	the	bio/health/social	space	
Coordinated with ESRC and government health departments 
  Provide	data	platforms:	Specialist	platforms	to	respond	to	the	
challenge	of	linking	and	analysing	the	exponentially	increased	volume	of	population-scale,	multimodal	data,	e.g.	phenotypes,	images,	whole	genome	sequencing,	microbiome,	diet	and	activity,	and	health	outcomes data 
  Provide	specialist,	interconnected	platforms	to	support	integration,	curation	and	linkage	of	broader	economic,	environmental	and	social	data and policy development
  Develop	digital	approaches	for	new	cohorts	supporting	the	economic	design,	set-up,	implementation	and	long-term	maintenance	of	cohorts
Developing	approaches	for	new	areas	of	data	linkage,	capture	and	integration	(environmental,	lifestyle	and	more	complex	biological	data)	would	build	on	the	completion	of	the	Digital	Innovation	Hub	partnership	with	the	NHS.
Health	Data	Research	UK	(HDR-UK)
Coordinated with government health departments and NHS
34
[Page #38]
Theme 6: Food safety and nutrition By	2050	the	world’s	population	is	predicted	to	expand	to	over	9	billion,	requiring	60%	more	food	and	a	reduction	in	food	waste.	The	UK	is	also	facing	major	challenges	around	food	safety	and	nutrition,	from	producing	safe,	sustainably	produced,	traceable	and	nutritious	food	and	animal	feed	to	preventing	diseases	related	to	malnutrition	and	food	contamination.	Food-related	ill	health	alone	costs	the	UK	health	service	£6	billion	per	year41.	Future	research	capability	will	need	to	consider	the	growing	need	for	diets	to	change	in	the	coming	decades	and	the	social	and	global	context,	population	factors	and	public	health	implications	of	this.	
determinants	of	food	consumption	behaviour	and	how	they	influence	long-term	health	(including	underpinning	policy)
A	‘food	systems’	approach	brings	together	aspects	of	both	areas	to	deliver	the	2015	Cross-council	vision	for	Food,	Nutrition	and	Health	research42	and	the	MRC/NIHR	Review	of	Nutrition	and	Health	commissioned	by	The	Office	for	Strategic	Coordination	of	Health	Research.	This	approach	can	be	used	to	develop	evidence-based	strategies	to	maximise	the	positive	impacts	of	food	on	health	–	from	early	life	to	increasing	a	healthy	lifespan	in	old	age	and	decreasing	the	economic	and	societal	costs	of	chronic	or	microbial diseases. 
Two	key	areas	need	to	be	addressed:•  Food systems and technology	–	e.g.	product	development,	manufacturing	and	processing;	food	safety	and	provenance;	and	animal	feed	(and	alternative	protein	sources	for	animal	feed	such	as	insects),	including	for	livestock	and aquaculture
Global	nutrition	considerations	are	also	required	to	transform	health	and	wellbeing	across	the	world.	Nutrition	plays	a	pivotal	role	in	non-communicable	diseases	in	lower-	and	middle-	income	countries	and	also	has	an	impact	on	response	and	resilience	to	infectious	diseases.	Work	continues	across	UK	Research	and	Innovation,	the	Department	for	International	Development	and	the	Department	of	Health,	through	the	Global	Challenges	Research	Fund,	to	support	some	of	these	global	challenges.	
•  Food, nutrition and health	–	e.g.	the	
nutritional	composition	and	bio-accessibility	of	food;	the	impacts	of	poor/malnutrition	on	human	health;	and	the	social	and	biological	
Theme 6: Food safety and nutrition
Integrating	of	multidisciplinary	bioscience,	medical	knowledge	and	population	approaches	to	develop	new	understanding	around	food	systems	technology	and	food,	nutrition	and	health.	Co-locating	key	capabilities	will	drive	a	holistic	‘food	systems’	approach	to	food	safety	and	nutrition.
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Specialist capabilities	for	food	systems	research
Investment	in	key	institutes	and/or	substantial	upgrade	of	existing	facilities	would	create	clusters	of	state-of-the-art	technologies,	building	on	expertise	across	existing	facilities,	e.g.	those	provided	by	the	Quadram	Institute,	the	Rowett	Institute,	Campden	BRI	and	Leatherhead	Food	Research.	This	infrastructure	would	focus	on	the	following	research	areas:
Coordinated with partners including health departments, Public Health England, ESRC, the Food Standards Agency
Food systems and technology  Food	innovation	and	quality:	food	composition,	future	foods,	
personalised nutrition
  Food	safety:	reducing	microbial	pathogens	in	the	food	chain,	biofilms,	
AMR;	food	provenance
Food, nutrition and health    The	microbiome,	IBD,	liver	and	lipid	disease,	ageing  Population	health,	societal	impact	and	public	health	
This	would	underpin	the	use	of	technologies	such	as	bioinformatics,	imaging,	‘omics,	nanotechnology	and	photonics	to	advance	our	understanding	of	food	systems	and	the	food	safety	and	nutrition	pipeline.	It	could	include	collaboration	or	access	to	industry	capabilities	and	campuses	for	food	systems	research	(e.g.	Syngenta’s	Jealott’s	Hill).
35
[Page #39]
Farmed	animal	production	faces	a	number	of	challenges	through	the	impact	of	climate	change	on	animals	and	agricultural	production	systems,	the	impact	of	the	livestock	themselves	on	the	environment,	increasing	scarcity	of	natural	resources	and	feed,	animal	welfare,	AMR	and	genetic	diversity.	New	tools	and	approaches	(e.g.	agri-tech	precision	agriculture),	in	combination	with	the	necessary	breeding	infrastructure,	will	allow	the	UK	to	tackle	increasing	demand	for	sustainable	production	of	healthy	livestock.	‘Genome-to-phenome’	predictive	breeding	capabilities	for	animals	(and	plants)	will	transform	our	ability	to	connect	genotype	to	phenotype	in	real	farm	environments,	driving	a	step-change	in	both	research	and	its	effective	translation	to	enable	evidence-based	decision-making	by	farmers	and	breeders.	
Theme 7: Advanced animal genomics, developmental biology and breeding infrastructures Advanced	genetic	and	genomic	approaches	enable	scientists	to	probe	the	function	of,	and	alter,	the	genes	of	animal	species.	This	has	major	implications	for	the	use	of	animals	in	research,	their	role	as	models	for	human	health	and	development,	and	also	in	breeding	programmes	as	livestock	and	food	sources.	
Advanced	animal	genomics	for	biomedical	research	requires	integrated	facilities	for	commonly	used	species,	combining	genome	editing	and	breeding	technologies	with	harmonised	phenotyping	instruments	and	standards.	Discovery	research	models	remain	a	key	tool	for	understanding	the	biological	underpinnings	of	health	and	disease	and	some	expansion	of	pre-clinical	models	will	be	required	for	precision	medicine	initiatives.	Maximising	the	knowledge	gained	from	animal	models,	 and	relevance,	will	often	need	facilities	with	more	advanced	non-invasive	and	intravital	imaging,	more	refined	sensors,	or	24/7	automated monitoring. 
As	these	are	global	challenges,	UK	participation	in	international	consortia,	such	as	Functional	Annotation	of	Animal	Genomes	(FAANG)	and	the	International	Research	Consortium	on	Animal	Health	(STAR-IDAZ),	is	important	to	provide	UK	researchers	and	innovators	with	access	to	international	facilities	and	databases,	and	with	opportunities	for	collaboration	and	coordination	at an international scale.  
36
[Page #40]
Theme 7: Advanced animal genomics, developmental biology and breeding infrastructures
Advanced	genomic	approaches	have	the	potential	to	revolutionise	animal	models	of	human	disease	and	approaches	to	livestock	breeding.	Developing	a	dispersed	ecosystem	of	world-leading	national	capability	will	support	approaches	to	improve	productivity,	sustainability	resilience	and	welfare,	and	will	support	the	use	of	animals	and	the	reuse	of	animal	data	to	inform	the	health	and	welfare	of	humans	while	addressing	changing	consumer	demands.
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Research	facilities	for	large	or	farmed	animals
Development	of	research	facilities	would	enable	accommodation	of:	
  Farmed species and larger animals including livestock and aquaculture for	improved	productivity	and	disease	resistance,	e.g.	the	Centre	for	Innovation	Excellence	in	Livestock,	The	Pirbright	Institute,	the	National	Avian	Research	Facility
  Genomics/sequencing	infrastructure	and	phenotyping	platforms	for	
genome-to-phenome	predictive	breeding
  Infrastructure	and	tools	for	precision	livestock	farming,	e.g.	real-time	
monitoring systems 
  The	generation	of	breeding	lines,	e.g.	Scotland’s	Rural	College	
  Pre-clinical	access	to	large	animals	to	develop	and	test	novel	therapies,	
biomedical	devices	or	surgical	innovations,	e.g.	the	Large	Animal	Research	and	Imaging	Facility
Integrated	specialist	facilities	for	animal	models used in research
Investment	in	specialist	integrated	facilities	would	provide	capability	for:
  Genome	editing	with	harmonised	phenotyping	instruments	 
and standards
  Insectaries	for	studies	on	arthropod	vectors	and	control	of	pests
  A	national	resource	for	the	sharing	and	reuse	of	samples,	archives	and	data	to	support	implementation	of	the	3Rs	(replacement,	reduction,	refinement)	and	research	reproducibility
  Translation	facilities,	e.g.	developing	and	producing	vaccines
37
[Page #41]
Germplasm	development	in	major	crops	is	pre-competitive and public sector investment will be key	to	furthering	predictive	breeding	approaches,	providing	markers	and	developing	phenotyping	tools	and	technologies	for	breeders	(e.g.	the	Designing	Future	Wheat	programme44).	Precision	agriculture,	which	aims	to	optimise	returns	on	inputs	while	preserving	resources,	will	require	a	variety	of	equipment	and	capabilities	to	function	across	scales	and	crop	types,	complementing	programmes	such	as	the	Industrial	Strategy	Challenge	Fund	(ISCF)	Transforming	Food	Production	programme.	Developments	in	this	area	are	particularly	important	as	they	underpin	sustainable agriculture. 
Theme 8: Plant genetics, pathology, phenotyping and agri-technology Understanding	the	molecular	basis	of	plant	life	is	essential	not	only	to	enable	the	UK	to	maximise crop yields and support sustainable production but also to underpin development of	a	wide	range	of	new	products	and	processes	of	economic	and	societal	benefit.	For	example,	novel	therapeutics	and	antibiotics,	metabolic	engineering	and	development	of	vaccines,	foods	with	improved	nutrient	contents,	industrial	feedstocks	and	catalysts	and	environmentally-friendly	agrichemicals.	Due	to	the	relative	ease	of	manipulation,	plants	are	also	used	as	model	systems	to	understand	aspects	of	fundamental	biological	functions.	Infrastructure	investment	can	build	our	understanding	of	the	molecular	basis	of	plant	life	and	how	this	can	translate	to,	for	example,	new	breeding	lines	and	technologies	for	the	agricultural	industry,	as	outlined	in	the	UK	Strategy	for	Agricultural	Technologies43. 
Multiscale	phenotyping	facilities	will	be	crucial,	including	advances	in	robotics	technologies	as	well	as	large-scale	field	infrastructure	and	unmanned	aerial	vehicles	(UAVs)	delivering	‘lean’	field	phenotyping,	where	portability	of	phenotyping	equipment	is	maximised.	Technology	developments	across	agriculture,	including	in	precision	agriculture,	phenotyping	and	AI	(e.g.	to	improve	farm-level	decision-	making),	will	require	translation	through	means	such	as	the	Agri-Tech	Centres	(CHAP,	Agri-EPI,	Agrimetrics,	and	the	Centre	for	Innovation	Excellence	in	Livestock)	for	use	by	farmers,	breeders,	growers	and	industry.	
This	requires	coordinated	(and	often	co-located)	investment	in	infrastructure	including	specialist	molecular	biology	laboratory	facilities	(with	appropriate	containment	where	needed),	high-throughput	and	specialist	sequencing	technologies,	plant	transformation	facilities,	controlled	environment	growth	rooms,	glasshouse	facilities	and	field-scale	trial	sites.	
38
[Page #42]
Theme 8: Plant genetics, pathology, phenotyping and agri-technology
Advancing	the	understanding	of	the	molecular	basis	of	plant	life	will	enhance	health,	quality	and	yields	for	UK	and	worldwide	benefit.	Integrated	infrastructure	is	required	comprising	equipment	and	capabilities	for	plant	genetics,	genomics,	pathology	and	phenotyping,	and	developments	in	infrastructure	and	technology	for	translation	into	the	agri-tech	sector.	This	will	be	essential	for	the	UK	to	‘bridge	the	genotype-to-phenotype	gap’	to	maximise	yields	towards	food	security	and	support	sustainable	crop	production	in	times	of	a	changing	climate.
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Centres	of	excellence
State-of-the-art	specialist	facilities	would	enable	the	multi-faceted	and	multidisciplinary	integration	needed	to	address	these	challenges.	This	would	include	dedicated	specialist	laboratories	and	technology	platforms,	controlled	environment	and	in-field	facilities	and	capacity	for	storage	of	plant	genetic	materials.	An	example	would	be	investment	into	next-generation	infrastructure	at	the	John	Innes	Centre/	Sainsbury	Laboratory	to	create	a	national	hub	for	plant	and	microbial	research	developing	critical	mass	and	important	complementarity	from	co-location	with	other	key	institutes	on	the	Norwich	Research	Park.	
Major	upgrades	to	existing	facilities	at	other	key	UK	institutes,	such	as	Rothamsted	Research,	the	Institute	of	Biology,	Environmental	and	Rural	Sciences,	the	National	Institute	of	Agricultural	Botany,	CHAP,	Agri-EPI,	Agrimetrics	and	university-based	large	facilities,	would	enable	the	UK	to	keep	abreast	of	the	significant	technological	developments	being	made	 in	this	field,	e.g.	in	breeding	technologies,	precision	agriculture	and	phenotyping.
Large-scale	phenotyping	facilities,	field-scale	systems	and	farm	platforms
Investment	in	large-scale	phenotyping	facilities,	field-scale	systems	and	farm	platforms	will	be	key	to	advancing	plant	science	and	agriculture.	Bringing	these	data	together	with	multiscale	biology	approaches	will	engender	new	knowledge	and	add	value	to	these	infrastructures.
Priority	areas	would	include:
  Precision	agriculture	(e.g.	high-tech	combine	harvesters,	remote-
sensing	systems)
  ‘Lean’	field	phenotyping	(e.g.	UAVs	for	field-scale	imaging,	handheld	
devices	for	pathogen	detection	or	portable	crop-	monitoring	systems)
  In-field	robotics	technologies
  In-situ	state-of-the-art	instrumentation	for	monitoring	field	or	farm-scale	
inputs and outputs
Development	of	a	UK	network/node	for	plant	and	crop	phenotyping
Coordination	of	plant	and	crop	phenotyping	facilities	to	build	a	networked	national	capability,	which	could	function	as	the	UK	partner	in	international	programmes	(e.g.	a	UK	node	for	the	European	Infrastructure	for	Multi-Scale	Plant	Phenomics	and	Simulation	(EMPHASIS)	programme).
39
[Page #43]
support	both	fundamental	discovery	research	and	also	a	range	of	application	areas.	Industrial	biotechnology	is	strongly	supported	by	synthetic	biology,	through	the	provision	of	tools	and	technologies	such	as	metabolic	engineering,	seamless	genome	modification	and	enzyme	repurposing.	Synthetic	biology	and	industrial	biotechnology	are	essential	to	establishing	a	sustainable	bioeconomy,	moving	away	from	the	fossil	fuel-based	economy,	as	envisaged	in	the	government’s	Bioeconomy	Strategy	2018–203037	and	Clean	Growth	Strategy45.	This	requires	multidisciplinary,	specialist	centres	with	state-of-the-art	integrated	laboratory	facilities	which	offer	high-throughput	and	automated	approaches,	underpinned	by	powerful	computing	capabilities	for	AI,	modelling	and	simulation.	
Themes 9 and 10: Synthetic biology  and Industrial biotechnology, and Innovative infrastructures Delivering	the	Life	Sciences	Industrial	Strategy36 and	increasing	inward	investment	from	the	bioscience sector requires investment in infrastructure	for	discovery	science	to	translate	new knowledge to market.
Synthetic biology and industrial biotechnology have	the	potential	to	deliver	new	products,	applications	and	industrial	processes	through	the	(re)design	and	engineering	of	biologically	based	parts	and	systems	and	the	use	of	cell	factories	and	enzymes	for	producing	and	processing	materials	and	chemicals.	Developments	through	the	use	of	synthetic	biology	approaches	have	the	potential	to	
CASE STUDY:  The Open Access Biorefining Centres; R&D innovation across the UK
  BDC,	working	with	the	Centre	for	Novel	
The	BEACON	Biorefining	Centre,	Biorenewables	Development	Centre	(BDC),	Centre	for	Process	Innovation	(CPI)	and	Industrial	Biotechnology	Innovation	Centre	(IBioIC)	provide	services	that	help	support	growth	in	the	bioeconomy.	The	Centres	accelerate	and	de-risk	commercialisation	of	bio-based	product	manufacturing	and	biorefining	technology	development.	This	includes	development	and	scale-up	of	sustainable	processes	and	products	from	plants,	algae	and	waste	streams:	
Agricultural	Products,	has	established	two	pilot	pre-industrial	seaweed	biorefinery	plants	which	are	being	used	to	refine	vital	seaweed	compounds	into	pharmaceuticals,	food	and	feed	ingredients	and	precursors	for	biodegradable	plastics	for	example	
  CPI	has	developed	specialist	equipment	for	LightOx	Limited	to	enable	compound	screening	of	molecules	for	the	development	of	next-generation	skin	and	oral	cancer	treatment drugs 
  The	BEACON	pilot-scale	facility	helped	
develop	a	cost-effective	and	scalable	method	of	producing	Galanthamine	–	effective	in	the	treatment	of	Alzheimer’s	disease	–	from	daffodils,	through	a	collaboration	with	Agroceutical	Products	Ltd
  IBioIC	provided	access	to	equipment	for	
initial	scale-up	of	algal	biomass	separation,	extraction	and	filtration	processes	to	 help	Scottish	company	Glycomar	extract	novel	glycomolecules	for	use	in	the	healthcare	sector	
I
PC
40
[Page #44]
  Deliver	specific,	early-stage	capabilities;	such	as	small-scale	manufacturing	and	rigorous quality control processes to support experimental medicine trials
Translating research into innovative products and technologies	requires	specialist	facilities,	which	may	be	in	‘challenge-oriented’	or	‘capability-oriented’	centres	and	broader	research	and	innovation	campuses	to	ensure	proximity	to	the	right	expertise	and	environments.	Creating	support	for	early	translation	will	enable	the	development	of	a	richer	pipeline	and	pull-through.	This	could	develop	a	seamless	transition	to	the	NIHR	research	infrastructure	to	continue	the	next	phase	of	translation	for	patient	benefit	and	economic	growth.	Facilities	can:
  Support	prototyping	and	analytics,	including	
complex	pilot	and	demonstration-scale	facilities	and	production-scale	testing	capabilities	(see	case	study),	with	linkages	to	end-users	and	early	adopters	in	the	agri-tech,	engineering or medical sectors
On	a	broader	scale,	centres	and	campuses	can	support	the	co-location	of	multiple	state-of-the-art	technologies,	incubator	space	and	expertise	in	responsible	research,	regulatory	frameworks,	legal requirements and business development that	few	universities	or	start-ups	would	have	the	capacity to assemble in isolation.  
  Provide	flexible	labs	for	joint	academic/	industry/NHS	collaborative	projects	
Theme 9: Synthetic biology and industrial biotechnology
The	tools	and	technologies	developed	through	synthetic	biology,	and	the	products	and	processes	enabled	by	industrial	biotechnology,	will	have	significant	impact	on	discovery	research	and	industrial	sectors	ranging	from	agriculture	to	pharmaceuticals	and	will	be	essential	to	establishing	a sustainable bioeconomy.
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Specialist centres
Specialist	centres	would	enable	discovery	science	and	the	translation	process	through	provision	of	state-of-the-art	integrated	facilities	(to	enable	the	design-build-test-learn	cycle),	including	advanced	technology	platforms,	automated	pipelines	and	high-throughput	approaches	to	development,	prototyping	and	analytics.	
These	could	comprise	new	capability	and	capacity	grounded	in	existing	thematic	multidisciplinary	Synthetic	Biology	Research	Centres,	plus	expansion	to	establish	and	build	on	other	centres	of	critical	mass,	as	well	as	DNA	Foundries	and	coordinated	industry-academic	networks	in	industrial	biotechnology.
Scale-up	and	production	facilities
Development	of	scale-up	and	production	facilities	would	enable	the	translation	of	new	products	and	processes	developed	in	the	laboratory	to	industrial-scale	manufacturing,	including	pilot-	through	to	demonstration-scale	facilities	(e.g.	fermentors)	and	production-scale	testing	capabilities,	with	appropriate	linkages	to	end-users/early	adopters.
International	facilities	and	networks
Coordination	and	networking	of	the	UK	capability	would	enable	access	to	international	facilities	and	networks	such	as	those	provided	by	ESFRI	projects,	e.g.	the	European	Industrial	Biotechnology	Innovation	and	Synthetic	Biology	Accelerator.
This	could	be	through	an	expansion	of	the	Synthetic	Biology	for	Growth	and	Synthetic	Biology	UK	(SBUK)	activities,	plus	the	Networks	in	Industrial	Biotechnology	and	Bioenergy.
41
[Page #45]
Theme 10: Innovation infrastructures
Delivering	a	step-change	in	impact	through	the	creation	of	new	innovation	infrastructures	that	host	the	right	mix	of	technologies	and	expertise	to	successfully	‘pull	through’	new	innovation	solutions	from	discovery	science.
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Accelerators/centresCoordinated with industry, Innovate UK, EPSRC, the NHS and UK health departments
Establishing	new	accelerators	or	centres	would	provide	a	range	of	focused	capabilities	to	accelerate	the	development	of	emerging	technologies,	processes	or	treatments,	bridging	the	gap	to	application.	For	example:
  Challenge-focused:	e.g.	rare	disease	diagnostics	and	treatment,	 
or	net-zero	agriculture	and	food	production	
  Capability	development	and	pre-competitive	(‘one	step	out	of	the	lab’)	demonstrator	facilities:	e.g.	synthetic	biology	tools	and	services	such	as	those	at	the	SynbiCITE	synthetic	biology	accelerator,	or	creating	regulated	manufacturing	facilities	for	prototype development and piloting innovations 
  Technology	readiness	centres:	e.g.	developing	a	technology	
for	clinical	use,	such	as	7T-MRI,	or	translation	of	biotechnology	innovations	into	the	marketplace,	such	as	through	the	Centre	for	Process	Innovation
Priority	areas	could	include:
  Engineered	cell-based	therapies
  Anti-infective	industry	partnerships
  Implantables,	neuroelectronics	and	nanotechnologies
  Digital	health	care	and	developing	AI	for	clinical	use	
  Precision	medicine,	emerging	diagnostic	technologies	or	sensors
CampusesCoordinated with industry, Innovate UK, EPSRC, UK government agencies and departments, the NHS
Development	of	existing	or	new	campuses	focusing	on	development	of	critical	mass	with	close	proximity	to	key	delivery	partners/	users	(academics,	industry	including	farming,	the	NHS)	would	enhance	access	to	incubator	space,	automated	analytics	platforms,	scale-up	facilities	and	technology	development.	
Computing	for	the	life	sciences	has	specific	requirements and accordingly tailored architectures,	which	are	designed	to	enable	memory-intensive	parallel	processing	in	addition	to	managing	large	volumes	of	data,	integration	with	relevant	biological	databases	and	the	use	of	data	commons	by	dispersed	collaborators.	Of	primary	importance	to	this	sector	are	large-scale	Research	Data	Infrastructures	configured	to	meet	the	specific	requirements	and	complexity	of	the	data	types	and	processing	necessary	for	research	in	the	biological	and	medical	sciences.	The	use	of	tailored	HPC	is	now	routine,	for	example	when	making	sense	of	the	petabytes	of	data	generated	by	imaging,	‘omics	and	genome	sequencing	technologies,	
Theme 11: E-infrastructure for  Life SciencesThe	rate	of	data	generation	across	all	modalities	is	increasing	and	complex	algorithms	and	methodologies	are	required	to	integrate	diverse	data	types,	presenting	significant,	strategic	opportunities	for	data	reuse,	in	deep	learning	and	in	other	AI	applications	supporting	the	biosciences.	A	range	of	e-infrastructure	solutions	will	be	required	to	harness	heterogeneous	biological,	clinical,	population	and	environmental	research	data	and	link	these	with	routine	and	real-world	data,	driving	the	need	for	research	data	infrastructures	to	integrate,	analyse	and	share	complex	data	sets.	
42
[Page #46]
or	running	biomolecular	simulations.	These	research	data	infrastructures	may	serve	a	broad	swathe	of	the	community	(academic	and	industrial)	by	providing	access	to	a	range	of	validated	and	well-curated	data	sets	supported	by interoperable systems and advanced analysis and	modelling	tools,	such	as	at	EMBL-EBI	which	services	requests	from	3.3	million	unique	sites	and	works	with	researchers	in	sixty-four	countries.	Other	research	data	infrastructures	may	focus	on	a	specific	challenge	such	as	food	security	at	the	Earlham	Institute,	where	HPC	is	combined	with	expertise	in	bioinformatics,	bioscience	and	statistics,	and	the	processing	capability	needs	to	be	physically	located	close	to	the	experimental	work	generating	the	data.	
Other	e-infrastructures	operate	as	distributed	or	virtual	infrastructures,	such	as	HDR-UK,	which	provides	access	to	large-scale	data	and	advanced	analytics	gathered	from	twenty-two	partners	across	six	regions,	uniting	the	UK’s	health	data	to	make	discoveries	that	improve	people’s	lives.	These	distributed	e-infrastructures	may	extend	beyond	the	UK	and	across	Europe,	as	with	ELIXIR	which	brings	together	life	science	data	resources	from	twenty-two	members	located	in	twenty-one	countries	across	Europe.	ELIXIR	comprises	of	a	hub	based	in	the	UK,	plus	national	nodes	including	a	UK	node	(Chapter	8),	and	internationally	as	the	UK	hosts	a	node	of	CyVerse,	a	US-based	cyberinfrastructure	for	life	science	research.	
CASE STUDY: EMBL-EBI
The	European	Bioinformatics	Institute	(EMBL-EBI)	is	part	of	the	European	Molecular	Biology	Laboratory	(EMBL),	Europe’s	flagship	laboratory	for	the	life	sciences	and	home	of	the	world’s	most	comprehensive	range	of	freely	available	molecular	data	resources.	EMBL-EBI’s	databases,	tools	and	software	support	millions	of	researchers	to	share	and	exploit	complex	information	efficiently	to	make	ground-breaking	discoveries,	with	over	64	million	web	requests	received	every	day.	Independent	estimates	suggest	a	year	of	research	undertaken	using	EMBL-EBI	data	resources	provides	economic	returns	of	£920	million	annually6. 
progression	and	treatment,	rare	diseases,	microbial	resistance,	and	modelling	infection	outbreaks,	as	well	as	wider	ventures	to	improve	our	understanding	of	biology,	including	marine	systems,	stable	crops	and	biodiversity.	
As	the	host	of	the	ELIXIR	hub	which	brings	together	data	from	across	twenty-one	member	countries,	EMBL-EBI	additionally	supports	the	wider	coordination	of	biological	data	provision	across	Europe.	It	works	in	partnership	with	businesses	from	the	pharmaceutical,	agri-food,	nutrition	and	healthcare	sectors	on	pre-competitive	collaborations.	The	largest	of	these	partnerships,	Open	Targets,	is	systematically	identifying	and	prioritising	targets	to	use	for	development	of	safe	and	effective	medicines.	
EMBL-EBI	serves	as	an	anchor	partner	in	many	human	health	programmes	covering	disease	
I
BE-LBME
43
[Page #47]
This	sector	also	requires	access	to	and	 sufficient	capacity	in	high-capability	computational	infrastructure	through	national	and	international	domain-agnostic	facilities	(Chapter	8).	There	is	also	the	need	for	appropriate	storage	infrastructure	and	the	ability	to	link	and	integrate	different	data	types	and	sources,	e.g.	personal	or	health	data,	taking	account	of	controlled	access	and	security/encryption	requirements,	and	the	retention	of	data	for	reuse	over	long	periods	of	time	 
(e.g.	for	longitudinal	cohorts).	Following	the	FAIR46	principles	(to	make	data	Findable,	Accessible,	Interoperable	and	Reusable)	is	fundamental	to	realising	the	scientific	opportunities	offered	by	data	linkage/alignment,	including	reproducibility.	UK-based	institutions	(for	example,	EMBL-EBI,	UK	Biobank	and	the	Image	Data	Resource)	have	world-leading	capabilities	for	collecting,	integrating	and	publishing	reference	data	sets	for	the	global	scientific	community.
Theme 11: E-infrastructure for life sciences
The	biological	sciences,	health	and	food	sector	needs	access	to	varied	and	well-integrated	e-infrastructure	solutions	to	harness	the	diverse	and	vast	sources	of	heterogeneous	data	and	combine	these	with	routine	and	real-world	data.	This	includes	a	coordinated	set	of	research	data	infrastructures	and	enabling	services	(software,	people)	to	integrate,	analyse,	store	and	share	complex datasets.
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Biological	sciences,	health	and	food	sector-specific	research	data	platforms
Biological	sciences,	health	and	food	sector-specific	research	data	platforms	tailored	to	support	disciplines	in	the	life	sciences	(e.g.	synthetic	biology,	multiscale	biology,	animal/plant/human	health,	phenotyping,	imaging,	structural	biology),	would	provide	access	to	a	range	of	validated	data sets supported by interoperable systems and advanced analysis and modelling tools. 
Significant	upgrades	to	existing	capabilities	would	be	needed	on	an	approximate	five-year	cycle,	which	may	require	entirely	new	phases	of	development.	Specific	opportunities	include:
  Phase	2	of	the	EMBL-EBI	Technical	Infrastructure	project	to	
accommodate	new	archives	to	expand	the	first	large-scale,	open	‘reference’	archive	for	imaging	data	and	develop	new	resources	specific	to	serious	global	challenges	(e.g.	Antimicrobial	Resistance,	sustainable	food	production,	biodiversity	and	personalised	medicine)
  Significant	expansion	of	the	UK	node	of	ELIXIR	to	support	BioFAIR,	
a	data	sustainability	institute	supporting	the	coordination	and	development	of	UK	life	science	data
  Additional	platforms	which	will	also	be	necessary	for	new	challenge	
areas,	e.g.	AI	centres	for	exploring	biological	data	or	mining	population	and	cohort	data
44
NREC
[Page #48]
Chapter 4: Physical sciences and engineering sector
45
[Page #49]
The physical sciences and engineering sector covers all branches of physics,  chemistry and mathematics and includes materials science, information and computing technology, quantum technologies and engineering. Research in this area has application in healthcare technologies, the digital economy and manufacturing industries. Knowledge generation through to application, innovation and commercialisation in this sector directly supports delivery of the Industrial Strategy Grand Challenges and many of the Sector Deals, including those on automotive, AI, construction, nuclear and creative industries47. The breadth of infrastructures, aligned with expertise in technology development, provide opportunities for strong industrial collaboration.
From	advancing	our	knowledge	of	the	Universe	to	our	understanding	of	new	materials	and	chemical	reaction	dynamics	and	mechanisms,	excellent	research	and	innovation	across	this	sector	requires	access	to	world-class	research	and	innovation	infrastructures.	Advances	in	technology	and	digitisation	are	also	vital	to	enhance	capability	in	this	sector	and	will	provide	the	foundational	aspects	of	many	of	the	new	technologies	adopted	within	the	food	sector,	life	sciences,	cultural	heritage,	Earth	sciences	and	beyond.	Innovations	in	the	physical	sciences	and engineering sector will provide novel materials,	new	sensors	and	imaging	modalities	and	novel	analytical	techniques.	
other	government	agencies	that	develop	and	operate	infrastructure	across	this	broad	sector,	from	fundamental	research	infrastructures	to	higher	Technology	Readiness	Level	(TRL)	demonstrators.	The	larger,	multi-sector	facilities	are	discussed	in	detail	in	Chapter	9	and	are	also	significant	contributors	to	the	physical	sciences	and engineering landscape.
Infrastructures	within	this	sector	can	be	described	as	capability	and	discovery	driven,	application	driven	or	challenge	driven	(Figure	10).	To	answer	complex,	interdisciplinary	problems,	a	combination	of	approaches	is	needed	that	often	make	use	of	infrastructures	across	the	different	categories.
Within	UK	Research	and	Innovation,	three	councils	(Science	and	Technology	Facilities	Council	(STFC),	Engineering	and	Physical	Sciences	Research	Council	(EPSRC)	and	Innovate	UK)	support	the	majority	of	research	and	innovation	activity	in	the	physical	sciences	and	engineering	sector.	Other	critical	organisations	in	this	sector	include	the	UK	Space	Agency	(UKSA),	the	National	Physical	Laboratory	(NPL),	the	Atomic	Weapons	Establishment	(AWE)	and	several	government	departments	and	agencies	including	the	Defence	Science	and	Technology	Laboratory	(DSTL).	International	collaborations	and	funding	are	particularly	important	in	fundamental	physics	where	the	scale	of	the	activity	requires	substantial	investment	from	many	partners	and	UK	participation	in	large	international	projects	is	a	key	part	of	the	government’s	International	Research	and	Innovation	Strategy100.
Given	the	different	scales	and	types	of	infrastructure	in	this	sector,	the	interconnectivity between	high-quality,	lab-based,	distributed	facilities	and	large-scale,	campus-based	facilities	is	particularly	important.	There	are	several	successful	equipment-sharing	initiatives	that	have	underpinned	the	development	of	institution-based and distributed clusters of equipment or facilities that are managed as single infrastructures,	thereby	ensuring	more	effective	use.	The	ability	to	replace	individual	pieces	of	equipment	within	a	cluster	(examples	from	the	capability	and	discovery	category	in	Figure	10	would	include	NMR	or	mass	spectrometers)	might	be	within	the	means	of	a	single	institution	or	funder.	However,	the	ability	to	concurrently	refresh	multiple	items	or	make	investments	in	larger-scale,	next-generation	systems	on	behalf	of	the	whole	UK	community	needs	strategic	decisions	at	a	national	level	(Chapter	9).	EPSRC’s	National	Research	Facilities	(NRFs)	are	an	example	of	how	this	is	done	in	practice.	NRFs	support	strategic	resources	of	national	importance	to	provide	leading-edge	capabilities	and	technique	development at a national level in response to community need.
4.1 Overview of current capability The	physical	sciences	and	engineering	sector	includes	a	range	of	technologies	and	tools	at	all	scales	from	distributed	networks	of	imaging	infrastructure	to	large-scale,	single-sited	infrastructures	such	as	telescopes	and	lasers.	In	addition	to	university-based	infrastructures	there	are	a	number	of	Catapults,	PSREs	and	
46
[Page #50]
Advancing knowledge
seirogetacgnireengne
dnasecnecs
C
a
p
A
a
C
p
b
ilit
h
p
l
a
i
l
c
l
y
e
a
i
&
t
n
i
g
o
D
i
e
n
l
acsyhP
s
c
o
i
v
i
e
r
y
srotces-busgnireengne
dnasecnecs
X-raydiffraction
Automotive
Aerospace
Telescopes
Magnetism
Robotics
Quantum
Communi-cations
Advancedmaterials
Space
Tomography
Mass Spec
Lasers
i
l
Manufac-turing
acsyhP
Electronics
Microscopy
NMR
Spectroscopy
i
i
Accelerators& Detectors
noitavonnI
serutcurtsarfnI
&hcraeseR
Figure	10.	The	classification	and	sub-sector	grouping	of	the	physical	sciences	and	engineering	research	and	innovation	infrastructures.
In	the	Landscape	Analysis,	27%	of	infrastructures	cited	physical	sciences	and	engineering	as	their	primary	sector	and	there	are	strong	interdependencies	with	the	biological	sciences,	health	and	food,	environmental	sciences and energy sectors. Many have an expected lifespan of over twenty-five years, reflecting	the	size,	complexity	and	significant	investment	typical	of	this	sector.	Such	infrastructures	often involve decades of planning and investment	to	identify	the	highest	priorities	
and	initiate	planning	and	design	phases	before	construction	can	begin.	For	instance,	the	complexity	of	the	build	of	the	Extremely	Large	Telescope	(ELT)	means	that	although	plans	were	agreed	in	2002,	construction	only	started	in	2014	and	first	operations	are	not	expected	until	2025.	The	design	stages	of	large-scale	infrastructures	are	often	significant	research	activities	in	their	own	right	involving	the	build	or	development	of	novel	technologies	and	techniques	as	a	precursor	to	developing	the	final	infrastructure.
47
[Page #51]
CASE STUDY:  Investment in design stages: Extreme Photonics Applications Centre (EPAC) 
The	BEIS	and	MoD	funded	(£81	million)	EPAC,	based	at	the	Harwell	Campus	in	Oxfordshire,	will	explore	the	development	and	application	of	novel	accelerators	and	associated	energetic	particle/radiation	sources	using	lasers.	The	project	took	a	number	of	years	to	evolve,	requiring	substantial	conceptual	funding	through	government,	external	partnerships	and	commercial	arrangements.		
DEVELOPING THE DiPOLE LASER TECHNOLOGY PLATFORM
PROOF OF PRINCIPLE APPLICATION EXPERIMENTS
2009–2015
£12 million to developnew technologybasis forapplications
2014–2015
FACILITY TECHNICAL DESIGN REPORT
£2 million forexperimentsusing CLFfacilities
2016–2018
BUSINESS CASE
£3 million for comprehensivebuilding and equipmenttechnical design
2018–2019
£1.5 million for comprehensivebusiness case
complex	products	and	systems,	we	will	require	increasingly	sophisticated	experiments	and	observations	for	their	calibration	and	validation.	Large	research	and	innovation	infrastructures	by	their	nature	create	large	data	sets;	therefore,	continuing	to	develop	the	skills	and	capacity	and state-of-the-art e-infrastructure to meet the	demand	of	the	data	production	and	analysis	volumes	is	essential	for	this	sector.	
4.2 Future direction As	with	all	other	sectors,	successful	infrastructures	need	to	enable	cutting-edge	research	using	state-of-the-art	equipment,	in	the	right	place	and	underpinned	by	well-qualified	technical	support.	In	the	physical	sciences	and	engineering	sector,	developing	networks of facilities that bridge the gaps from smaller-scale infrastructures to large facilities will be important	to	ensuring	more	effective	use	is	made	of	mid-range	to	large-range	investments.	Encouraging	such	connectivity	should	help	to	develop	the	technical	and	analytical	expertise	that	is	needed	to	maximise	the	productivity	of	infrastructure	investments	and	enhance	the	quality	of	the	experimental	outputs.		
This	report	focuses	on	opportunities	for	step-changes	in	capability	through	new	infrastructures	or	major	upgrades	to	existing	capability.	However,	it	is	also	important to support existing capability to	maintain	the	UK’s	leading	position	in	technology	development	(e.g.	accelerators	and	detectors),	application,	monitoring,	observation	and	scientific	discovery	(including	national	institutes).	
Continuous technical advancements are required to	improve	how	we	undertake	research	due	to	the	increasing	complexity	of	physical	sciences	and	engineering	infrastructures,	extremely	large	data	rates,	challenging/extreme	environments	and	the	need	for	greater	technical	and	analytical	expertise	to	deliver	complete	systems.	Taking	an	active	role	in	building	novel	technology	for	UK	and	international	infrastructures	adds	to	our	competitive	edge	when	participating	in	the	highest-priority	international	ventures.	
Maintaining	UK participation in international physical sciences and engineering infrastructures	is	a	vital	part	of	securing	access	to	the	next-generation	of	capabilities.	There	are	continual	upgrades	at	international	facilities	supported	by	the	UK	and	where	UK	expertise	plays	a	critical	role.	For	example,	there	are	numerous	upgrades	in	progress	to	support	the	particle	physics	programme	at	the	European	Organisation	for	Nuclear	Research	(CERN).	This	involves	extensive	research	and	development	and	major	construction	programmes,	e.g.	the	
With	the	availability	of	increasing	computational	power,	large-scale	numerical	models	for	physical	phenomena	and	‘digital	twins’	for	
48
[Page #52]
ATLAS	and	CMS	detector	upgrades.	The	Large	Hadron	Collider	beauty	experiment	(LHCb)	and	A	Large	Ion	Collider	Experiment	(ALICE)	(ALICE)	collaborations	are	also	planning	major	detector	upgrades.	Programmes	such	as	these	for	detector	research,	development	and	construction	in	particle	physics	and	similarly	for	telescope	instrument	construction	(e.g.	the	ELT)	for	astronomy,	are	very	important	contributions	to	the	international	science	infrastructure	with	significant	technical	and	engineering	work	undertaken	in	UK	universities,	national	laboratories and industry.
4.3 Future requirements  and opportunitiesConsultation	over	the	course	of	this	programme	has	identified	six	key	themes	that	could	shape	the	direction	of	physical	sciences	and	engineering	infrastructures	over	the	next	ten	years	and	beyond.	These	themes	have	been	updated	to	incorporate	feedback	received	and	additional	work	done	since	the	publication	of	the	Progress	Report.	Within	each	of	the	themes,	we	present	some	potential	opportunities	for	future	infrastructure	capability	with	illustrative	examples.	These	have	been	identified	through	a	number	of	routes	including	programme	evaluations,	community	workshops	and	reviews	of	UK,	European	or	global	roadmaps.		
Support for community engagement, conceptual design, R&D and prototyping to improve	existing	or	create	new	infrastructures	is	particularly	critical	in	this	sector	where	infrastructures	are	often	large	and	technically	complex.	Such	studies	are	significant	research	activities	in	their	own	right,	often	involving	the	build	or	development	of	novel	technologies	and	techniques	as	a	necessary	precursor	to	developing	the	final	infrastructure.
The	scale	of	opportunities	within	the	physical	sciences and engineering sector varies widely and	opportunities	for	UK	partnerships	or	national	research	and	innovation	infrastructures	will	change	over	time.	The	themes	present	challenges	that	can	be	addressed	through	a	number	of	routes	and	it	will	be	important	for	the	UK	to	connect	to	other	international	roadmaps	and activities. 
Understandingthe Universe
1
Enhancing futureconnected digitaltechnologies
Novel technologies forthe next-generationinfrastructures
6
2
PhysicalPhysicalsciences andsciences andengineering neeengineering sectorectsectorthemesthemes
Catalysing productive and clean growth
3
5
Future transportsolutions
4
Technologies to improve healthand treatment
Figure	11.	Physical	sciences	and	engineering	themes	overview.
49
[Page #53]
As	described	in	Chapter	2,	Section	2.4	the	opportunities	for	future	infrastructure	capability	described	within	the	themes	are	at	different	stages	of	development.	Some	ideas	need	further	work	to	better	understand	the	requirement,	strategic	importance,	support	within	the	community	and	ability	to	be	delivered	whilst	others	are	more	developed	and	could	be	implemented	sooner.	The	landscape	is	fluid	and	opportunities	will	arise	during	the	next	few	years	while	some	opportunities	will	become	less	relevant	or	superseded.	Scientific	peer	review	and community consultation will allow us to gauge support and to tension opportunities. There	will	also	be	significant	upgrades	to	existing	capabilities	that	have	not	been	captured	here	as	they	are	beyond	the	timeframe	of	this	report,	e.g.	Square	Kilometre	Array	2.
beginnings	of	the	Universe	takes	us	from	exotic	conceptual	theories	of	physics	to	experiments	underground	trying	to	detect	dark	matter,	and	from	state-of-the-art	mega-simulations	of	galaxies	forming	and	evolving	to	space	missions	attempting	to	understand	the	nature	of	dark	energy.	The	goal	of	understanding	our	origins	encompasses	all	areas	of	theory,	experimentation	and	observation,	and	can	truly	be	considered	a	fundamental	scientific	challenge.
We	know	that	microbial	life	can	survive	in	hostile	and	extreme	environments	such	as	deep-sea	geothermal	vents.	The	consensus	now	is	that	where	there	is	water,	nutrients	and	an	energy	source	such	as	our	Sun,	there	is	the	possibility	for	discovering	life.	The	obvious	first	place	 to	search	for	extraterrestrial	life	is	within	our	own solar system. Possible examples include Mars,	which	may	have	regions	in	its	permafrost	that	could	harbour	microbial	communities,	 and	in	the	subsurface	water	ocean	of	Jupiter’s	moon Europa.
Theme 1: Understanding the UniverseResearch	in	particle	physics,	particle	astrophysics,	astronomy,	space	science	and	nuclear	physics	seeks	to	understand	the	Universe	from	the	largest	astronomical	scales	to	the	fundamental	building	blocks	of	matter.	Advancing	knowledge	in	frontier	physics	will	require	UK	participation	in	R&D	to	design,	construct	and	eventually	exploit	new	experiments,	as	well	as	upgrades	to	existing	experiments	such	as	the	High-Luminosity	Large	Hadron	Collider	(HL-LHC).	The	scale	of	the	infrastructures	needed	for	such	experiments	will	involve	long-term	planning	and	commitments	 to international collaborations. Examples of	current	international	projects	with	UK	participation,	set	to	begin	operations	in	the	coming	decade	after	many	years	of	planning	 and	implementation,	include	Square	Kilometre	Array	(SKA),	Extremely	Large	Telescope	(ELT),	the	Large	Synoptic	Survey	Telescope	(LSST)	 and	the	Long-Baseline	Neutrino	Facility	(LBNF)	and	Deep	Underground	Neutrino	Experiment	(DUNE)	in	the	USA.	The	technological	challenges	to	overcome	will	create	opportunities	for	research	and	industry	collaboration	with	the	potential	for	wider	application	of	technologies	in	industry	sectors	such	as	advanced	manufacturing	and	healthcare.	
Satellites and telescopes are now discovering thousands	of	planets	orbiting	other	stars	in	our	galaxy.	These	new	observations	are	revealing	many	exoplanet	systems,	which	will	help	us	to place our solar system in a wider context. Studying	them	will	help	us	understand	how	common	solar	systems	like	our	own	are	and	how	many	exoplanets	might	be	capable	of	supporting	life.	We	may	even	be	able	to	recognise	the	existence	of	life	on	these	distant	worlds.
Subtheme: What are the basic constituents of matter and how do they interact? There	are	still	many	challenges	remaining.	Why	is	there	so	little	antimatter	in	the	Universe?	How	did	the	Universe	evolve	from	the	Big	Bang	to	now?	What	is	dark	matter	made	of	and	how	does	it	behave?	Above	all,	we	want	a	deeper	and	more	complete	understanding	of	our	universe	at	these	most	fundamental	levels.	
There	are	significant	e-infrastructure	needs	that	support	this	theme,	including	essential	upgrades	to	existing	HPC	and	HTC	infrastructures,	such	as	Distributed	Research	using	Advanced	Computing	(DiRAC)	Facility	(Chapter	8,	Section	8.1).	New	potential	infrastructures,	such	as	a	supercomputer	that	would	be	a	step	towards	an	exascale	system,	would	ensure	outputs	from	the	physical	sciences	and	engineering	sector	can	 be maximised.  
Subtheme: How did the Universe begin and how is it evolving? How do stars and planetary systems develop and how do they support the existence of life? Adding	knowledge	of	the	structure	and	constituents	of	the	Universe	reveals deeper questions and mysteries about how	nature	fits	together.	Understanding	the	
50
[Page #54]
Theme 1: Understanding the Universe
Subtheme: How did the Universe begin and how is it evolving? How do stars and planetary systems develop and how do they support the existence of life?
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Ground-based	observational astronomy
UK	participation	in	international	collaborations	to	construct	new	telescopes	would	enhance	UK	astronomy	capability.	There	are	several	options	such	as:	the	Simons	Observatory	for	observations	of	the	cosmic	microwave	background,	to	understand	the	conditions	of	the	very	early	Universe	better;	the	European	Solar	Telescope	to	observe	and	model	the	physical	processes	in	the	solar	atmosphere,	providing	detailed	understanding	of	the	Sun’s	activity	and	its	impact	on	space	and	Earth;	the	New	Robotic	Telescope	which	could	provide	UK	leadership	in	time	domain	and	solar	system	physics,	such	as	the	discovery	and	characterisation	of	extrasolar	planetary	systems;	and	the	Gravitational	Wave	Optical	Transient	Observer	(GOTO)	which	could	improve	the	ability	to	localise	the	sources	of	gravitational wave events.
Gravitational	Wave	observatories
The	Einstein	Telescope	is	a	proposed	third-generation	Gravitational	Wave	(GW)	observatory	in	Europe	and	one	of	the	highest-priority	projects	on	the	Astroparticle	Physics	European	Consortium	roadmap.	As	the	second-generation	of	GW	detectors	reach	their	limits,	the	Einstein	Telescope	would	ensure	GW	observing	capacity	for	the	coming	decades,	while	at	the	same	time	increasing	instrument	sensitivity.	This	would	allow	us	to	map	GW	sources	through	the	different	ages	of	the	Universe	to	answer	questions	about	the	nature	of	black	holes	and	neutron	stars.	The	Einstein	Telescope	is	expected	to	be	constructed	and	operated	as	an	international	organisation,	with	site	selection	estimated	to	take	place	in	2021/22	and	construction	to	commence	in	2024.
Next-generation	particle	astrophysics	infrastructures
Participation	in	one	or	more	international	particle	astrophysics	infrastructures	would	complement	the	UK’s	existing	capabilities	and	fill	gaps	in	the	research	portfolio.	Opportunities	for	the	UK	include:	high-energy	astrophysics	with	one	of	the	next-generation	of	gamma-ray	observatories	such	as	the	High-Altitude	Water	Cherenkov	Observatory,	the	Southern	Gamma-ray	Survey	Observatory,	or	the	Cherenkov	Telescope	Array;	astrophysical	neutrino	observatories;	the	Atomic	Interferometric	Observatory	and	Network	to	probe	as-yet	mostly	unexplored	frequency	bands	of	the	GW	spectrum;	and	the	next-generation	of	direct	dark	matter	searches.	
Lunar	Orbital	Platform	Gateway
The	Lunar	Orbital	Platform	Gateway	is	a	collaboration	between	the	National	Aeronautics	and	Space	Administration	(NASA),	the	European	Space	Agency	(ESA)	and	other	international	partners.	It	would	provide	a	facility	and	infrastructure	for	learning	how	to	live	and	work	in	deep	space	and	a	staging	post	for	lunar	activities,	as	well	as	offering	a	range	of	opportunities	for	science	in	deep	space.	The	European	contributions	to	this	endeavour	would	be	the	provision	of	the	service	module	to	the	Orion	vehicle	that	would	transfer	the	astronauts	to	and	from	the	Gateway,	and	component	parts	of	the	Gateway	structure.	The	first	modules	are	expected	to	be	flown	in	the	mid-2020s.
51
[Page #55]
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches cont.
Mars	Sample	Returns
An	international	campaign	led	by	NASA	with	collaboration	from	ESA	to	collect	material	from	the	surface	of	Mars	and	return	it	to	earth.	The	mission	has	long	been	one	of	the	highest	priorities	for	planetary	science,	but	it	is	only	now	that	we	have	the	technical	capability	to	implement	it.	NASA	will	launch	the	ascent	vehicle	in	either	2026	or	2028	with	the	samples	being	returned	in	2031	or	2033.	
The	main	curation	facility	for	the	samples	returned	is	provisionally	planned	for	the	USA,	but	there	is	an	opportunity	for	the	UK	to	host	a	secondary	curation	facility	that	will	host	a	second	set	of	back-up	samples	for	archiving,	should	there	be	issues	with	the	primary	facility	such	as	contamination	episodes.	This	could	have	significant	multidisciplinary	applications	across	life	sciences	and	geological	sciences.
Next-generation	space science and exploration missions
ESA	is	planning	a	programme	of	future	space	missions	through	its	Cosmic	Vision	and	Voyager	2050	programmes.	There	are	opportunities	for	the	UK	to	provide	significant	contributions	to	these	missions,	building	on	excellence	in	scientific	techniques	and	novel	technologies.	
There	is	also	potential	for	UK	space	science	and	space	exploration	programmes	through	bilateral	agreements,	to	participate	in	missions	with	non-European	space	agencies,	such	as	NASA,	the	Japanese	Aerospace	Exploration	Agency	and	the	China	National	Space	Administration.	
Subtheme: What are the basic constituents of matter and how do they interact?
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
State-of-the-art	nuclear	physics	facilities
The	UK	could	participate	in	new	nuclear	physics	experiments	at	international	facilities,	such	as	CERN,	the	Facility	for	Antiproton	and	Ion	Research,	the	University	of	Jyväskylä,	the	Jefferson	Laboratory	and	the	RIKEN	research	institute.	In	all	cases	this	would	bring	opportunities	for	the	UK	to	develop	and	implement	detector	technologies	which	capitalise	on	the	UK’s	world-leading	expertise	and	address	key	scientific	questions	in	the	area	of	nuclear	structure	and	astrophysics.	There	are	a	number	of	options	including	an	upgrade	of	the	Advanced	Gamma	Tracking	Array	or	an	Advanced	Charged-Particle	Array.
Next-generation	Electron	Ion	Collider
The	Electron	Ion	Collider	in	the	USA	will	be	the	world’s	first	doubly	polarised	electron-nucleon/light-ion	collider	and	the	world’s	first	electron	heavy-ion	collider.	The	new	facility	is	expected	to	commence	operations	around	2030,	providing	variable	centre-of-mass	energies	and	high	luminosities.	UK	involvement	would	give	unprecedented	access	to	the	structure	of	nucleons	and	nuclei,	exploiting	the	nucleus	as	a	laboratory	for	the	study	of	quantum	chromodynamics.
52
[Page #56]
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches cont.
Next-generation	particle	physics	experiments 
To	ensure	continued	UK	leadership	in	key	international	particle	physics	experiments	over	the	next	two	decades	would	require	UK	participation	in	the	development	of	research	infrastructures	at	international	facilities	such	as	CERN	(Switzerland),	Fermilab	and	the	Sanford	Underground	Research	Facility	(USA),	the	Paul	Scherrer	Institute	(Switzerland)	and	the	Japan	Proton	Accelerator	Research	Complex.	The	opportunities	and	future	landscape	will	be	continuously	reviewed	by	the	STFC	advisory	panels.	
Next-generation	particle	physics	colliders
The	future	direction	of	the	energy-frontier	programme	beyond	HL-LHC	will	push	the	boundaries	of	our	current	understanding	of	the	Universe.	The	scale	and	complexity	of	the	next	large-scale	colliders	requires	planning	now.	Options	being	considered	include:	an	energy	upgrade	for	the	LHC	(HE-LHC);	a	new	electron-positron	linear	collider,	which	could	be	either	the	International	Linear	Collider	in	Japan	or	the	Compact	Linear	Collider	at	CERN;	the	Future	Circular	Collider	at	CERN;	or	the	Circular	Electron	Positron	Collider	in	China.	UK	participation	would	be	guided	by	the	update	to	the	European	Strategy	for	Particle	Physics	in	2020	led	by	CERN.	
Boulby	Underground	Laboratory	capability	
The	Boulby	Underground	Laboratory	in	Yorkshire	is	the	UK’s	large,	deep	underground	physics	laboratory.	There	is	an	opportunity	to	exploit	the	recent	investments	in	this	facility	by	hosting	a	large-scale	international	experiment	in	the	UK,	such	as	a	next-generation	dark	matter	experiment	or	a neutrinoless double beta decay experiment.
Subtheme: Advanced characterisation and imaging. Developing	the	next-generation	characterisation	and	imaging	infrastructures	will	be	inherently	interdisciplinary,	supporting	academia	and	industry	across	health,	aerospace	materials,	nuclear	materials	and	semiconductor	devices.	This	requires	small-	and	large-scale	instrumentation	to	help	understand	and	correlate	materials	at	different	length	scales,	from	atoms	to	components.	In	some	areas,	intermediary	facilities	are	needed	to	support	precursor	studies,	analyses,	sample	preparation	and	user	training	and	bridge	the	gap	between	local	capability	and	larger	facilities.
Theme 2: Novel technologies for the next-generation infrastructuresAdvances	in	detectors	and	receivers,	instrumentation,	accelerator	science,	specialist	engineering	and	optics	are	needed	to	enhance	existing	and	build	new	world-leading	physical	sciences	and	engineering	infrastructures.	These	advances	can	have	wider	applications	across	other	sectors.	The	UK	is	at	the	cutting	edge	of	technology	development	in	these	areas	and	innovations	developed	by	UK	scientists,	engineers	and	technologists	are	frequently	sought-after	internationally.
Subtheme: Developing advanced technologies. Development	of	new	technologies	including	detectors and instrumentation also requires dedicated	infrastructure	and	can	put	the	UK	at	a	competitive	advantage.	Enhanced	capability	to	develop	technologies	including	detectors,	sensors	and	optics,	for	example,	would	also	stimulate	the	development	of	feasibility	studies	and	pump-priming	activities	to	enhance	future	infrastructure	developments.	
53
[Page #57]
Case Study: Xspress4 pulse processor
Diamond	Light	Source	(Diamond)	and	STFC	staff	worked	together	to	develop	the	next-generation	of	pulse	processor:	Xspress4.	Synchrotrons	like	Diamond	use	techniques	such	as	X-ray	Absorption	Fine	Structure	(XAFS)	to	examine	the	structure	of	materials	at	the	atomic	scale.	Pulse	processors	enhance	the	throughput	of	the	semiconductor	detectors	used	at	the	facility	for	XAFS	experiments	by	a	factor	of	two	to	three	and	enhance	data	quality.	This	gives	Diamond	a	competitive	advantage,	allowing	analysis	of	very	challenging	samples	that	could	not	be	analysed	before	and	making	better	use	of	the	X-ray	beam	time	due	to	the	improved	counting	rate	of	the	detector.	The	Xspress4	pulse	processor	will	be	commercialised	by	Quantum	Detector,	a	spinout	company	from	STFC	and	Diamond.
ecruoSthgLdnomaDtasnneDmaharG
i
i
i
The	Xspress4	pulse	processor.	
Theme 2: Novel technologies for the next-generation infrastructures
Subtheme: Developing advanced technologies 
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Novel	prototyping	and	fabrication	facilities
Requirements	for	new	and	advanced	technologies	are	already	emerging	from	the	space	sector	and	the	users	of	large-scale	national	facilities	such	as	Diamond	and	the	ISIS	Neutron	and	Muon	Source.	The	development	of	these	technologies	would	require	dedicated	new	prototyping	and	fabrication	facilities.
One	such	opportunity	would	be	a	facility	for	multilayer	fabrication	and	characterisation.	Examples	of	research	applications	include	niche	optical	coatings,	coatings	for	superconductors,	active	pumping	surfaces	and	corrosion-	and	wear-resistance	surfaces.	Furthermore,	engineered	surface	properties	are	important	across	a	growing	number	of	application	areas	(accelerators,	sensor	materials,	quantum	systems)	and	access	to	fabrication	facilities	will	significantly	increase	the	opportunities	for	academic innovation and speed up industrial uptake.
Extending	novel	fabrication	from	2D	to	3D	microstructures	would	also	give	opportunities	to	support	next-generation	target	fabrication,	enabling	new	realms	of	high-energy	density	science	to	be	explored	as	well	as	new	applications	of	high-average-power	lasers,	such	as	carbon	ion	radiotherapy	and	neutron	analysis	of	buildings.
Development	of	a	novel accelerator systems test bed
There	is	increased	interest	in	novel	particle	accelerator	technologies	which	address	key	scientific	questions	across	multidisciplinary	areas,	from	energy-frontier	particle	physics	experiments	to	diagnosing	and	treating tumours. 
54
[Page #58]
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches cont.
Development	of	a	novel accelerator systems test bed cont.
A	new	UK	novel	accelerator	centre	would	build	on	existing	UK	expertise	through	investment	in	laser,	plasma	and	dielectric	particle	accelerator	techniques	that	could	revolutionise	the	many	uses	of	accelerators	in	science	and	technology.	The	centre	could	be	either	a	single	entity	or	distributed	and	could	include	free-electron	laser	technologies.	Expert	advice	will	be	sought	on	future	options	and	priorities.		
Detector Systems Hub
In	recent	years,	the	UK’s	large-scale	national	facilities,	such	as	Diamond,	have	made	substantial	advances.	In	order	to	fully	exploit	our	facilities,	tomorrow’s	instrumentation	systems	require	matching	development	to	meet	the	increases	in	accelerator	brilliance	and	dynamic	range.
A	new	Detector	Systems	Hub	would	provide	a	national	focus	for	the	development	of	next-generation	instrumentation	systems.	The	facility	would	ensure	continued	UK	technical	leadership	in	the	discovery,	development	and	application	of	novel	and	innovative	detector	and	sensor	technologies	for	applications	in	fundamental	and	applied	science.
Development	of	lab-based	mid-range	facilities	of	national	importance:	accelerator-driven,	low-energy	light	source
Exploiting	the	complementary	capabilities	of	two	light	sources	–	 Free	Electron	Lasers	for	Infrared	eXperiments	(FELIX)	in	Nijmegen	and	 the	Accelerators	and	Lasers	In	Combined	Experiments	(ALICE)	accelerator	at	Daresbury	–	would	enable	creation	of	the	Advanced	infrared/Terahertz	Facilities	for	Users	of	Lasers	(ARTFUL).	The	two	suites	of	free-electron	light	sources	have	complementary	capabilities.	Combining	them	into	a	single,	distributed	facility	would	create	a	single	community	and	enable	users	to	develop	research	programmes	benefitting	from	access	to	both	sources.
Development	of	lab-based	mid-range	facilities	of	national	importance:	ultrafast	dynamic	imaging
Development	of	a	national	facility	centred	on	the	unique	measurement	capabilities	offered	by	Relativistic	Ultrafast	Electron	Diffraction	and	Imaging	(RUEDI).	
RUEDI	allows	the	evolution	of	structural	changes	in	materials	to	be	observed	through	time-resolved	pump-probe	experiments.	A	new	facility	would	be	unique	in	the	UK	by	allowing	the	function	of	a	material	to	be	determined,	rather	than	simply	its	static	structure.	A	RUEDI	facility	would	provide	a	conduit	from	the	study	of	fundamental	materials	and	biological	processes	to	the	advanced	technologies	associated	with	them.
Advanced imaging
Development	of	a	facility	of	national	importance	in	X-ray	Computed	Tomography	would	sit	at	the	heart	of	the	UK’s	physical	sciences	and	engineering	research	and	innovation	infrastructure	portfolio,	supporting	the	rapid	maturation	of	advanced	materials	and	other	fields.
Future capability for	mass	spectrometry
Work	is	needed	in	consultation	with	the	community	to	identify	the	specific	opportunities	for	significant	technique	development	and	define	a	coherent	national	effort.	This	would	enable	a	more	coordinated	programme	of	upgrades	to	national	and	regional	facilities,	better	utilisation	of	local	facilities	and	greater	collaboration	across	sectors.
55
[Page #59]
Subtheme: Advanced characterisation and imaging
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Ultra-high-field	NMR	facility:	the	UK’s	first	national	NMR	spectrometer	with	field	strength	in	excess	of	1.0GHz
Continued	investment	in	world-leading	NMR	facilities	would	provide	a	toolkit	that	would	enable	new	scientific	breakthroughs.	It	would	allow	scientists	to	study	molecules	(their	structure	and	how	they	move,	behave	and	interact)	in	more	detail	than	is	currently	possible,	supporting	fundamental	and	applied	research	in	the	UK	across	a	range	of	disciplines	including	chemistry,	engineering,	biosciences	and	medicine.
Enhanced	provision	for	characterisation	and imaging techniques	of	national importance
National	Research	Facilities	are	providing	access	to	a	wide	range	of	state-of-the-art	equipment,	specialist	analysis	and	training	for	academic	and	industrial	users	in	a	sustainable	way.	They	play	a	key	role	in	the	interconnectivity	between	lab-based,	distributed	facilities	and	large-scale	campus-based	facilities.	There	is	an	opportunity	to	enhance	and	refresh	our	portfolio	of	these	facilities	to	ensure	that	they	continue	to	provide	access	to	state-of-the-art	facilities	for	the	widest	possible	range	of	users,	for	example	in	techniques	such	as	Electron	Paramagnetic	Resonance	and	X-ray	crystallography.
Acquisition	of	instruments to perform	cutting-edge	photo-electron	spectroscopy experiments	at	the	national level
Photo-electron	spectroscopy	is	a	powerful	and	versatile	analytical	technique	with	multiple	applications,	as	well	as	being	a	research	area	in	its	own	right.	It	enables	the	characterisation	of	surfaces	and	interfaces	and	as	such	underpins	research	activities	across	a	broad	user	community	including	chemistry,	engineering,	physics,	biology,	materials	science,	bioengineering,	pharmacy,	environmental	sciences	and	life	sciences.
Guided	by	the	photo-electron	spectroscopy	community	roadmap48,	there	is	an	opportunity	to	invest	in	instruments	which	would	be	capable	of	performing	photo-electron	spectroscopy	experiments	at	the	national	level.
industry.	However,	there	is	still	a	need	for	research	with	a	longer	time	horizon,	which	is	essential	for	developing	new	ideas,	concepts	and	technologies	and	ensuring	that	they	are	pulled	through	into	applications	to	support	the	emergence	of	new	UK	industries.
Theme 3: Catalysing productive  and clean growthThe	ability	to	deliver	a	more	agile,	creative	and	internationally	competitive	UK	economy	can	be	enhanced	through	new	discovery	research,	alongside investments to accelerate knowledge exchange	and	commercialisation.	
Subtheme: Commercialisation and application of quantum technologies. We	want	to	make	the	UK	the	first	choice	as	a	place	to	research,	innovate	and	commercialise	quantum	technologies.	This	requires	the	development	of	a	quantum	technologies	ecosystem	to	enable	the	full	supply	chain	for	delivering	quantum	technology	systems	that	will	disrupt	the	semiconductor,	oil	and	gas,	construction,	telecommunications	and	computing industries50.	Quantum	technologies	that	are	currently	being	developed	may	lead	to:
Subtheme: Manufacturing futures. Advances in industrial digitalisation and automation have	the	capacity	to	transform	manufacturing	processes,	enhancing	the	competitiveness	of	the	UK	industrial	base.	The	government’s	Made	Smarter49	review	highlighted	the	importance	of	industrial	digital	technologies	to	the	global	competitiveness	of	the	UK’s	manufacturing	sector.	Increasing	automation	across	the	economy	in,	for	example,	transport,	extreme	environments,	manufacturing	and	construction	may produce important economic and social benefits.	Through	the	Industrial	Strategy,	investment	is	being	made	in	manufacturing	research	of	immediate	importance	to	UK	
  More	secure	communications  Resilient	navigation	–	seeing	through	fog,	
rain,	snow	and	around	corners
  Better	brain	imaging
56
[Page #60]
  Improved	construction	productivity  Aiding	the	discovery	of	new	oil	and	 
there	have	been	a	number	of	different	types	 of	institutes	established	including:
gas reserves
  Providing	new	quantum	computers	which	 
  The	Alan	Turing	Institute,	the	national	
can solve complex problems51
institute	for	data	science	and	AI
  The	Henry	Royce	Institute,	the	national	
The	construction	of	commercial,	large-scale	practical	quantum	computers	is	a	significant	challenge.	Quantum	computers	being	built	by	Google	and	IBM	are	expected	to	demonstrate	hardware	which	for	the	first	time	can	outperform	the	best	classical	computers	at	certain	special	tasks	and	simulations	within	the	next	one	to	 two years.
institute	for	advanced	material	research	 and innovation
  The	UK	Collaboratorium	for	Research	on	
Infrastructures	and	Cities	(UKCRIC)
  The	Rosalind	Franklin	Institute,	focused	on	transforming	life	sciences	through	interdisciplinary	research	and	technology	development
  The	Faraday	Institution,	the	UK’s	independent	institute	for	electrochemical	energy	storage	science	and	technology,	supporting	research,	training and analysis
Subtheme: Realising the potential of physical sciences and engineering. In	the	engineering	and	physical	sciences	landscape,	national	institutes	provide	a	platform	for	longer-term,	multi-organisation	activities	and	play	a	leading	role	in	the	development	of	the	research	base	and	the	technologies	derived	from	it.	In	recent	years,	
Opportunities	to	scope	the	development	of	new	activity will be explored.
CASE STUDY:  Henry Royce Institute
Researchers	from	the	Henry	Royce	Institute	acted	as	expert	witnesses	for	GlaxoSmithKline	plc	in	a	recent	patent	dispute.	They	used	state-of-the-art	electron	microscopy	to	map	particles	in	an	inhaler	powder	to	treat	progressive	lung	disease.	This	collaboration	allowed	GlaxoSmithKline	to	successfully	defend	the	patent	and	has	stimulated	further	research	with	the	UK	pharmaceutical	industry	
in	the	application	of	microscopic	imaging	and	analytical	method	to	these	materials.
The	Henry	Royce	Institute	has	been	set	up	to	accelerate	the	invention	and	take-up	of	new	materials	systems	that	will	meet	global	challenges,	enhance	industrial	productivity	and	competitiveness	and	shape	the	world	around	us.		
etutitsn
IecyoRyrneHehT
57
[Page #61]
Theme 3: Catalysing productive and clean growth
Subtheme: Manufacturing futures
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Digital manufacturing	centres	of	excellence
It	is	essential	that	new	ideas,	concepts	and	technologies	are	pulled	through	into	application	to	support	the	emergence	of	new	UK	industries.	We	want	to	ensure	that	manufacturing	research	with	a	long	time	horizon	can	build	on	the	excellence	of	UK	discovery	science.
Working	in	collaboration	with	the	Connected	Everything	Network	Plus	and	other	stakeholders,	we	will	explore	specific	infrastructure	needs	in	this	area	with	a	view	to	developing	academic-led,	distributed,	digital	manufacturing	centres	of	excellence.	These	centres	would	ensure	that	technologies	emerging	from	our	research	base	are	developed	with	manufacturing	in	mind	and	will	take	a	systems	approach	that	focuses	on	the	integration	 of	technologies.
Residual	stress	is	a	major	cause	of	problems	in	manufacturing,	leading	to	failures	in	infrastructure	such	as	trains,	planes	and	power	stations.	A	new	centre	would	support	UK	industry	with	multiple	investigative	techniques	to	characterise	and	model	complex	engineering	components	and	structures.	It	would	provide	capabilities	for	measuring	strain,	stress	and	damage	in	materials	ranging	from	the	nanoscale	to	structures	that	are	ten	times	heavier	than	any	other	facility	worldwide	could	deal	with.
International	stress	engineering centre
Subtheme: Commercialisation and application of quantum technologies
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Community-driven	capability mapping across	the	advanced	fabrication	landscape	–	including	semiconductors and quantum	technologies
Our	consultations	have	highlighted	a	lack	of	state-of-the-art	capacity,	in	particular	for	new	users,	and	a	need	for	national	coordination	to	encourage	sharing	of	facilities	and	to	take	advantage	of	potential	efficiencies.	However,	the	landscape	and	future	needs	are	not	yet	well	understood	or	articulated.	We	will	support	the	community	to	conduct	detailed	work	to	identify	the	current	landscape	and	future	national	infrastructure	needs	to	enable	reliable,	reproducible	micro-	and	nano-fabrication.
National	Quantum	Computing	Centre
Creation	of	a	National	Quantum	Computing	Centre	would	provide	a	centre	of	excellence	to	develop	tools,	computational	algorithms	and	applications	software	to	accelerate	the	practical	application	of	quantum	computing.	This	would	seek	to	make	the	UK	a	leader	in	this	emerging	field,	as	well	as	providing	access	to	a	state-of-the-art	quantum	computing	facility	for	the	academic	and	commercial	community.	The	long-term	aim	would	be	to	host	a	practical	application	of	quantum	computing	in	the	UK.
Subtheme: Realising the potential of physical sciences and engineering
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Scope	future	national	institutes	in	physical	sciences and engineering
New	national	institutes	would	allow	the	UK	to	leverage	and	build	world-leading	research	strengths	by	drawing	together	people,	expertise	and	facilities	across	institutional	boundaries.
58
[Page #62]
  Developing	affordable	and	inclusive	
Theme 4: Technologies to improve health and treatmentHealthcare	systems	are	under	pressure	from	a	number	of	issues	including	an	ageing	society,	mental	and	physical	health	concerns	and	an	increasing	focus	on	personalised	medicine.	Physical	scientists	and	engineers,	working	in	partnerships	with	the	wider	health	and	social	care	community,	develop	innovative	techniques	and	technologies	for	adoption	into	UK	and	international	healthcare	systems	to	improve	patient outcomes. Future opportunities to achieve	this	include:
technologies	that	support	people	to	live	a	healthier	life	in	the	home,	workplace	or	wider	environment	to	prevent	ill	health	and	further	reduce	pressure	on	many	parts	of	the	NHS
Physical	sciences	and	engineering	research	is	critical	to	much	of	the	technological	innovation	that	could	be	applied	to	healthcare	and	address	the	Ageing	Society	Grand	Challenge,	as	well	as	providing	the	underpinning	AI	technologies	to	transform	the	prevention,	early	diagnosis	and	treatment	of	chronic	diseases	as	outlined	in	the	AI	and	Data	Grand	Challenge.	Recent	investments52	in	breast	cancer	detection	research	using	innovative,	portable,	low-cost	technologies	for	clinical	analysis	show	how	technologies	can	be	adapted	for	use	in	other	sectors.	Future	investments	might	focus	on	technologies	for	healthcare	provision	outside	of	the	clinical	setting	or	fully	automated	assistive	technologies	that	support	independent	living	and	ongoing	care	needs	(Chapter	3).	These	activities	will	be	supported	by	development	of	technologies	and	innovation	opportunities	to	maximise	the	impact	of	the	research	on	people’s	lives	and	the	wider	economy.	Such	technologies	will	also	support	the	social	sciences,	arts	and	humanities	sector	by	aiding	the	development	of	systems	for	improving	healthcare	workflow	or	efficiency	for	the	next-generation	of	public	services.	
  Advances	in	the	diagnostic	capabilities	
of	imaging	technologies	such	as	MRI	and	tomography
  Discovery	and	design	tools,	synthetic	
developments	and	manufacturing	approaches	for	future	therapeutic	agents
  Facilitating	frontline	healthcare	professionals	in innovation and evaluation centres to rapidly develop	and	iterate	technologies	for	adoption
  Working	with	healthcare	providers	to	explore	appropriate	solutions	that	transfer	some	of	the	service	provision	burden	away	from	primary	care	settings	and	into	people’s	 daily lives
CASE STUDY:  Cardiff University Brain Research Imaging Centre (CUBRIC)
CUBRIC	is	redefining	the	MRI	scanner	as	a	quantitative microstructural measurement tool.	CUBRIC	reduces	sources	of	variance	and	bias	and	improves	the	diagnostic	capabilities	of	this	widely	used	healthcare	technique.	Funding	from	UK	Research	and	Innovation	(EPSRC,	MRC)	allowed	the	development	of	the	National	Microstructural	Imaging	Facility	–	one	of	only	three	in	the	world	–	as	a	user	facility	accessible	to	researchers	across	the	UK.When	combined	with	other	facilities	at	the	centre,	including	the	UK’s	largest	HPC	cluster	dedicated	to	neuroimaging	applications,	this	creates	a	globally	unique	hardware	platform	to	develop	this	new	measurement	science.	This	cutting-edge	capability	has	attracted	three	holders	of	prestigious	international	fellowships	to	the	UK	 to	develop	the	technology	further.
ytisrevnU
i
ffidraCtane
ll
A
l
uaP
59
[Page #63]
Theme 4: Technologies to improve health and treatment
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Healthcare	technologies	innovation and evaluation centres
There	is	an	opportunity	to	establish	shared	environments	that	would	allow	academics,	health	professionals	and	other	partners	to	work	together	and	iterate	physical	sciences	and	engineering-driven	healthcare	technologies,	explore	integration	with	other	innovations	and	prepare	for	wider	health	sector	roll-out.	A	first	step	would	be	to	explore	requirements	in	consultation	with	the	community	and	develop	a	strategy	to	realise	healthcare	technologies	innovation	and	evaluation	centres.
Healthcare	capability	to underpin delivery of	healthcare	in	the	home,	including	diagnosis and treatment
Access	to	healthcare	through	primary	care	routes	are	under	significant	pressure,	partly	due	to	an	ageing	population.	There	is	an	opportunity	to	develop	technological	solutions	that	would	transfer	appropriate	healthcare	activity	away	from	the	established	primary	care	settings	and	into	people’s	homes.	The	potential	areas	for	focus	are	broad-ranging,	such	as	diagnostics,	patient	compliance,	therapeutic	manufacturing	in	the	home	and	rehabilitation	technologies.	The	specific	focus	of	any	activity	that	will	help	to	deliver	the	maximum	potential	benefit	on	a	large-scale	investment	is	therefore	currently	unclear.	
A	first	step	would	be	to	explore	and	identify	specific	infrastructure	options	through	engagement	with	the	community.	
Fully automated assistive	technology	capability,supporting complex and	changing	care	needs
Health	and	care	needs	are	requirements	of	every	individual	and	are	constantly	changing.	For	an	efficient	health	and	care	system,	monitoring	and	provision	cannot	be	limited	to	primary	care	providers	alone.	There	is	an	opportunity	to	innovate	technological	solutions	that	provide	support,	assistance	and	care	wherever	and	whenever	required,	in	either	the	home,	the	workplace	or	environment.	This	has	the	potential	to	span	aspects	from	robotic	prosthetic	devices	to	community-level	sensing	and	monitoring	for	mental	health	distress.
A	first	step	would	be	to	explore	and	identify	specific	infrastructure	options	through	engagement	with	the	community.	
Advanced	imaging:	MRI	scanner	with	magnetic	field	>10T
Higher	magnetic	field	strengths	provide	improved	spatial	and	temporal	resolution,	greater	sensitivity	to	physiological	changes	and	access	to	new	contrasts,	which	will	unlock	a	new	era	of	imaging	in	precision	medicine	allowing more complex biomedical questions to be investigated.
Investment	in	state-of-the-art	infrastructure	would	support	the	development	of	the	novel	technologies	and	image	processing	methodologies	required	to	enable	the	benefits	to	be	realised,	including	cascading	the	developments	to	lower-field	instruments	to	improve	 wider	efficiencies.
60
[Page #64]
seamless	systems	integration,	will	be	a	priority.	Such	step-changes	to	reduce	carbon	emissions	and	other	pollutants	will	contribute	to	the	Future	of	Mobility	Grand	Challenge	and	ensure	the	government	strategy	for	zero-emission	road	transport	can	be	achieved.	
Theme 5: Future transport solutions We	are	on	the	cusp	of	a	profound	change	in	how	we	move	people,	goods	and	services	around	our	towns,	cities	and	countryside.	Significant	investments	are	being	made:	in	the	electrification	and	automation	of	road	vehicles;	in	the	modernisation	of	rail	services	to	deliver	higher	capacity,	speed	and	connectivity;	and	in	the	development	of	autonomous	aerial	and	marine	transport.	There	is	a	need	to	consider	both	improvements	to	existing	transport	infrastructure	and	modalities,	and	how	best	to	implement	disruptive	new	technology	(such	as	connected	and	autonomous	vehicles).
We	want	to	build	on	existing	R&D	investments	that	have	allowed	the	UK	to	remain	at	the	forefront	of	aerodynamic	and	fluid	mechanics	research	such	as	the	distributed	network	of	wind	tunnels	that	are	currently	managed	collectively	as	the	National	Wind	Tunnel	Facility.	Increasingly,	the	role	of	wind	tunnels	(and	other	large	test	infrastructures)	is	not	so	much	to	test	the	scaled	physical	model	but	to	obtain	test	data	that	allows	model	validation	so	that	more	of	the	design	and	validation	can	be	done	by	computational	modelling	(such	as	creating	digital	twins)	rather	than	by	experimental	means.
Physical	sciences	and	engineering	research	has	an	important	role	in	improving	many	aspects	of	our	transport	systems:
  Vehicle	efficiency  Energy storage  Future	fuel	solutions  City	planning  Charging	infrastructure  Physical	and	cybersecurity
The	need	for	test	beds	and	demonstrators	at	higher	TRLs	will	be	addressed	in	part	through	some	recently	announced	activities	such	as	the	ISCF	challenges.	With	such	large-scale	experiments	there	will	be	many	opportunities	for	the	research	and	innovation	community	to	conduct	world-class	activity	in	areas	such	as	algorithm	development,	sensor	design	and	energy storage solutions.  
Decarbonised transport and automation will be at	the	heart	of	this	revolution.	Developing	more	environmentally	sustainable,	responsible	and	carbon-neutral	travel	through	electrification,	based	on	new	materials,	novel	technologies	and	
Theme 5: Future transport solutions
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Electrified	transport
Developing	truly	sustainable,	responsible	and	carbon-neutral	travel	through	electrification,	based	on	new	materials,	novel	technologies	and	systems	integration.	Electrification	across	all	transport	sectors	has	many	similarities	but	also	many	significant	differences,	therefore	it	is	not	clear	which	infrastructure	requirements	are	common	and	which	are	unique	to	specific	transport sectors.
This	is	an	early-stage	idea	and	the	next	step	would	be	to	develop	the	understanding	of	what	gaps	still	exist	for	research	and	innovation	infrastructures	across	the	transport	system	with	relevant	stakeholders,	including	academia,	the	Faraday	Institution	and	the	Department	for	Transport.	
National	Wind	Tunnel	Facility
An	existing	capital	investment	of	£14.5	million	in	2015	developed	and	upgraded	a	suite	of	seventeen	national	wind	tunnel	facilities	to	provide	a	service	that	is	greater	than	the	sum	of	its	individual	tunnels	and	researchers.	
The	next	phase	of	investment	would	provide	a	testing	and	expertise	infrastructure	driving	a	paradigm	shift	in	the	way	experimental	research	is	approached,	creating	a	strategically	important	infrastructure	as	recommended	in	the	community	wind	tunnel	roadmap53.
61
[Page #65]
people.	Many	of	the	challenges	of	exploring	the	future	of	mobility,	robotics	and	urban	planning	in	situ	can	be	overcome	through	the	use	of	living	labs	and	digital	twins.	As	well	as	being	a	safe	testbed,	living	labs	and	digital	twins	would	also	be	an	invaluable	source	of	data	for	researchers,	policy-makers,	public	planners,	regulators	and	product and service suppliers. Any investment in	these	infrastructures	should	encompass	the	underpinning	data	archive	that	gathers	and	curates	the	data	generated,	making	it	available	in	interoperable	formats	across	platforms	for	secondary analysis and modelling.
Theme 6: Enhancing future connected digital technologiesThe	UK	has	a	strong	track	record	of	developing	innovative	computational,	communications	and	electronic	technologies,	building	on	foundational	strengths	across	engineering	and	the	physical,	computational	and	mathematical	sciences.	We	are	world	leaders	in	AI,	data	analytics,	communications	networks,	mobile	technologies,	next-generation	electronic	hardware	and	materials,	alongside	research	at	the	interface	between	these	technologies	and	society.	
Subtheme: Powering future digital technologies. As	technology	and	power	use	continues	to	grow,	we	need	more	energy-	efficient	ways	of	designing,	controlling	and	powering	a	diverse	range	of	technologies.	Incorporating	an	improved	understanding	of	energy	demand	management	into	current	technology	development	will	have	a	significant	impact.	Research	into	materials,	power	storage,	electronics	design,	networks,	control	and	programming	could	also	be	transformational.	
The	concept	of	twinning,	the	integration	and	synchronisation	of	digital	and	physical	objects,	is	a	key	tenet	of	Industry	4.0.	Digital	twins	will	enable	the	creation	of	a	digital	model	of	a	product,	process	or	system,	and	its	virtual	testing,	prototyping	and	analysis	without	physical	production	or	testing.	Similar	requirements	for	digital	twins	have	been	identified	in	the	energy	sector	(Chapter	7).	 Some	investments	in	‘digital	twinning’	have	already	been	made	by	UK	Research	and	Innovation	and	UKCRIC.	Further	work	is	 needed	to	map	existing	capability,	assess	how	connected	it	is	and	determine	what	additional	infrastructure	might	be	needed.
Subtheme: Developing living labs and digital twins. The	intersection	of	technologies	such	as	robotics	and	AI	is	driving	the	evolution	of	smart	mobile	machines,	powered	by	clean	energy,	that	are	aware	of	the	world	around	them	and	able	to	interact	with	it,	with	one	another	and	with	
Theme 6: Enhancing future connected digital technologies
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Powering	future	digital	technologies:	investment to underpin more energy-efficient	ways	of	designing,	controlling and powering new technologies
To	prevent	technological	development	being	curtailed	by	energy	costs,	new	technologies	will	need	to	be	designed	to	limit	energy	demand,	be	usage-aware	and	adaptable,	and	potentially	contribute	to	energy	generation.  
The	next	step	would	be	to	work	with	the	research	and	business	communities	to	consider	the	options	for	common	energy	efficiency	challenges	across	application	sectors.	These	could	then	be	used	to	identify	the	specific	research	and	innovation	infrastructure	implications.
Developing living labs and digital twins
Learning	about	the	intersection	of	autonomous	vehicles,	drones,	smart	infrastructure,	robotics	and	smart	services	would	benefit	from	the	development	of	a	family	of	living	labs	or	demonstrators	that	can	drive	innovation,	experimentation	and	learning	through	the	delivery	of	working	solutions	to	real-life	problems.
The	next	step	would	be	to	explore	what	the	opportunities	and	requirements	might	be	for	infrastructure	investments	in	‘digital	twinning’	across	the	research	and	innovation	landscape.
62
[Page #66]
CASE STUDY:  Data and Analytics Facility for National Infrastructure (DAFNI)
DAFNI	is	a	facility	in	development,	funded	as	part	of	the	UKCRIC	and	based	at	STFC	based	at	the	Harwell	Campus.	It	provides	computational	resources	and	bespoke	software	applications	to	advance	the	state	of	national	infrastructure	research.	
‘Digital	twinning’	is	one	of	a	number	of	modelling	techniques	that	DAFNI	aims	to	support	through	the	standardisation	of	data/model	sources	and	common	access	to	these	resources.	The	DAFNI	facility	aims	to	provide	the	interfaces	and	mechanics	to	allow	integration	of	the	first	National	Digital	Twin	as	outlined	within	the	Gemini	Principles	published	by	the	Digital	Framework	Task	Group54.
yabaxPmorfkcV
i
i
irraH
63
[Page #67]
Chapter 5:  Social sciences, arts and humanities sector
yabaxPmorfnnam
i
tlAdreG
64
[Page #68]
Social sciences, arts and humanities are fundamental to understanding people, their interactions with the world around them and the ways in which their lives, the economy and the environment can be improved through evidence-based interventions. They provide the critical frameworks through which we can evaluate the impact of human activity and support the development of policy and practice to address the major challenges of our time. Infrastructures that support the social sciences, arts and humanities sector play a key role in ensuring the health, wealth and wellbeing of the nation, driving economic growth and creating the conditions for greater social cohesion, equality and inclusivity.  
Demand	for	social	sciences,	arts	and	humanities	research	from	academia,	industry,	government	and	the	third	sector	is	growing.	More	than	60%	of	UK	Government	departments’	areas	of	research	interest	(ARIs)55 questions are core social sciences,	arts	and	humanities	issues	with	a	further	20%	requiring	significant	social	sciences,	arts	and	humanities	input.	While	all	industrial	sectors	require	an	understanding	of	people	and	behaviour	(as	well	as	of	materials	and	processes),	the	fact	that	the	UK	economy	is	now	over	80%	services-based	makes	the	need	for	these	insights	all	the	more	important.	Large	and	complex	data	sets	can	be	analysed	to	gain	understanding	of	human	and	societal	behaviours,	mapping	the	movement	of	people,	practices	and	ideas	over	time and space.
This	chapter	draws	on	inputs	from	a	range	of	expert	advisory	groups	and	consultations,	with	representations	from	across	academia,	industry	and	government.	It	also	draws	on	a	number	of	earlier	independent	strategic	reviews	and	recommendations,	including	the	UK	Strategy	for	Data	Resources	for	Social	and	Economic	Research	2013–201857,	the	Administrative	Data	Taskforce	Report	December	201258 and more recently	the	Longitudinal	Studies	Review59.
5.1 Overview of current capability The	social	sciences,	arts	and	humanities	sector	comprises	data	collections,	surveys	and	longitudinal	studies,	as	well	as	large-scale	databases	and	repositories	which	provide	data	and	data	services	across	the	sector.	This	includes	universities	and	galleries,	libraries,	archives	and	museums	(GLAMs)	and	other	heritage	organisations	with	world-leading	collections,	serving	tens	of	millions	of	research	object	requests	per	year.	Heritage	science	infrastructures	can	act	as	bridges	between	the	humanities	and	sciences	by	using	scientific	analysis	and	technological	innovation	to	understand,	manage	and	communicate	the	human	story,	expressed	through	landscape,	buildings	and	artefacts.	
The	value	of	social	sciences,	arts	and	humanities	infrastructures	accumulates	over	time.	Museum	collections	facilitate	comparative	analysis	through	a	continual	process	of	collecting,	contextualisation	and	research,	and	longitudinal	studies	enable	increasingly	complex	insights	as	more	data	are	added	from	successive	sweeps.	These	collections	and	data	sources	make	up	a	significant	proportion	of	social	sciences,	arts	and	humanities	infrastructures	and	are	the	sectoral	equivalent	of	the	large-scale	instrumentation-based	facilities	found	elsewhere.	
There	is	a	strong	interdisciplinary	focus	in	this	sector’s	infrastructures	with	the	majority	(69%)	of	them	identified	in	the	Landscape	Analysis	as	contributing	to	research	and	innovation	in	other	sectors.	Nearly	three-quarters	(72%)	help	shape	public	policy	or	the	delivery	of	public	services.	Their	influence	also	extends	beyond	the	UK;	 89%	define	their	reach	as	international,	with	 the	majority	involved	in	national	and/or	international collaboration. 
UK	Research	and	Innovation	is	the	major	source	of	funding	for	large	parts	of	this	sector.	The	sector,	in	particular	the	arts	and	humanities,	also	receives	significant	funding	through	non-UK	Research	and	Innovation	government	funding,	philanthropic	sources,	charities	or	private	sector	support	such	as	through	the	Department	for	Digital,	Culture,	Media	and	Sport	(DCMS).	The	sector	includes	a	number	of	Independent	Research	Organisations	(IROs).	IROs	are	research	organisations	that	are	not	already	part	of	another	public	sector	research	body,	but	possess	in-house	capacity	to	carry	out	and	lead	research	independently	in	their	chosen	field	or	discipline56.
Figure	12	describes	the	current	capabilities	in	the	sector.	The	analytical	capabilities	include	models	and	simulations	of	considerable	sophistication,	for	example	economic	models	such	as	EuroMod	or	the	National	Institute	of	Economic	and	Social	
65
[Page #69]
Research	Macroeconomic	models.	Heritage	and	archaeological	sciences	both	demand	and	stimulate	collaborative	research	in	a	range	of	precision	technologies	such	as	remote	sensing	and	non-invasive	imaging.	Museums,	galleries,	historic	sites	and	properties	serve	as	incubators	for	immersive	technologies	and	enable	new	forms	of	community-led,	participatory	research.	Research	and	innovation	clusters	in	the	creative	industries,	especially	audiovisual	media	and	fashion,	demonstrate	the	efficacy	of	the	R&D	cluster	model	in	driving	innovation	and	adding	value.	Design	leads	a	suite	of	practice-based	methodologies	in	translating	research	into	commercial	and	social	innovations.	In	recent	years,	these	innovations	have	informed	transformation	in	areas	as	diverse	as	sustainable	fashion,	creative	education	and	immersive	experiences,	as	well	as	public	health	campaigns	about	smoking	in	pregnancy,	auto-enrolment	in	workplace	pensions	and	place-shaping	and	social	development	through	culture	and	heritage.	
Consumer	Data	Research	Centre,	the	Creative	Industries	Clusters	and	Audience	of	the	Future	programmes	collaborate	on	projects	with	a	range	of	businesses	and	government	partners.	Significant	resources	are	also	used	to	manage	access	to	commercially	sensitive,	restricted	or	personal	data,	and	to	support	creative	skills	and	the	communication	of	research	to	non-experts.	Planning	and	support	will	ensure	that	discrete	or	local	infrastructures	can	be	linked	to	enable	the	maintenance	of	former	projects	and	search	and	analysis	across	corpora	–	for	example,	the	ReStore	project,	part	of	the	National	Centre	for	Research	Methods,	which	preserves,	sustains	and	actively	maintains	selected	online	research	methods	and	resources	beyond	the	initial	funding	award.
5.2 Future directionSocial	sciences,	arts	and	humanities	researchers	consider	their	collections,	archives	and	data	sets,	along	with	the	e-infrastructures	required	to	access	and	unlock	them,	in	large	part	to	be	their	infrastructures.	The	large	increase	in	data	and	information	available	and	advances	in	the	technologies	to	integrate	and	analyse	these	sources	are	potentially	transformative	–	 in	particular:
Social	sciences,	arts	and	humanities	infrastructures	tend	to	be	long-lived.	Some,	such	as	the	British	Museum	(founded	in	1753),	have	existed	for	centuries	others	have	been	established	in	recent	decades,	for	example	the	National	Child	Development	Study	which	began	in	1958.	Such	longevity	brings	challenges,	including	the	need	to	store,	maintain,	preserve	and make accessible expanding collections. Across	all	infrastructures,	there	is	a	strong	focus	on	management	and	access,	both	physical	and	virtual,	with	researchers	accessing	data	and	services	through	embedded	expert	capability.	For	example,	the	UK	Data	Service	provides	access	to	major	UK	government-sponsored	surveys,	cross-national	surveys,	longitudinal	studies,	census	data,	international	aggregate,	business	data	and	qualitative	data.	The	Archaeological	Data	Service	(ADS)	is	a	world-leading	digital	heritage	data	archive	driving	advances	in	archaeology	and	data	management. Data services work to ensure the	long-term	sustainability	of	digital	archives	through	the	design,	development	and	trial	of	transformational	technologies.
  Expanding	the	capability	to	link	and	integrate	data	sets,	which	can	in	turn	generate	more	multi-level	models	incorporating	social,	economic,	environmental	and	physical	 (e.g.	geographical	and	geological)	data	
  Improving	usability	of	models	and	
simulations	for	policy	analysts	for	future	planning	and	‘what	if’	scenario	preparation,	coupling	these	models	with	the	research	and	interpretive	skill-sets	of	social	sciences,	arts	and	humanities	researchers	
  Using	the	increased	availability	of	real-time	data	streams	to	improve	the	response	time,	precision	and	accuracy	of	simulations	and	models 
  Using	machine	learning	to	support	analysis	 
of	very	large	data	sets
  Growing	the	capability	to	link	and	integrate	collections,	whether	of	objects	data	or	 multi-modal
These	infrastructures	support	access	to	data	and	collections	through	training,	events,	methods	and	tools.	They	play	an	important	role	in	developing	researchers’	analytical	skills	to	support	policy-making.	The	sector	also	adds	value	through	partnership	and	collaboration.	For	example,	the	Social	Data	Science	Lab,	the	
  Using	the	International	Image	Interoperability	
Framework	(IIIF),	which	opens	up	new	possibilities	for	building	discovery	
66
[Page #70]
Figure	12.	Current	Capabilities	in	the	social	sciences,	arts	and	humanities	sector.
applications and exploring collections even without	full	metadata
the	social	sciences,	arts	and	humanities	sector	is	to	prevent	time-bound	infrastructures	from	becoming	obsolete	on	completion	of	the	project.	Planning and support to link discrete or local infrastructures	could	enable	better	maintenance	and	utilisation	of	assets.	
  Public attitudes and policies are also 
changing	and	we	will	need	to	respond	to	public	demand	for	transparency,	privacy	and	informed	consent	
Appropriate and sustained investment: Integration	and	linkage	of	resources	across	the	sector	are	major	challenges	given	their	complex	and	multi-modal	nature.	We	currently	lack	tried	and	tested	cross-disciplinary	methodologies	to	achieve	this.	Enhancing	discoverability	and	interoperability	within	and	across	disciplines	will	catalyse	new	research	areas	and	drive	cross-disciplinary	working.	Key	areas	which	would	benefit	from	greater	interoperability	and	discoverability include creative industries and social	and	economic	research,	health	research	(e.g.	analysis	of	media	content	for	mental	health	research)	and	environmental	analysis	(e.g.	analysis	of	archaeological	evidence	to	predict	topographical	changes	over	time).	Success	here	is	dependent	on	appropriate	and	sustained	investment to maintain existing capabilities and develop	new	infrastructures.
The	following	key	themes	will	guide	social	sciences,	arts	and	humanities	infrastructure	development	over	the	coming	years:
Connectivity, discoverability and interoperability: This	sector	has	exceptional	resources	of	data,	information	and	collections.	Collectively,	these	information	sources	represent	the	systematic	accumulation	of	millennia	of	knowledge	and	practice,	creating	the	capacity	to	drive	innovation	and	to	inform	our	understanding	of	major	global	challenges.	Some	are	highly	connected	and	accessible	whilst	others	are	more	dispersed,	making	the	landscape	fragmented	and	resources	hard	to	find.	If	an	infrastructure,	such	as	a	website	or	database,	is	an	output	of	a	fixed-term	project,	it	is	rarely	maintained	as	a	live	resource	after	completion	and	rapidly	becomes	undiscoverable.	A	key	challenge	for	
67
[Page #71]
CASE STUDY:  Research using linked administrative data enhances government help with energy efficiency
yabaxPmorf79yksanitram
i
The	Welsh	Government’s	Warm	Homes	Nest	scheme	was	launched	in	2011	to	provide	free	home	energy	efficiency	upgrades	to	vulnerable	households60.	The	impact	of	the	scheme	was	evaluated	by	researchers	using	ESRC-funded	Administrative	Data	Research	Centre	to	access	NHS	and	administrative	housing	data.	They	found	that	individuals	who	were	part	of	the	scheme	were	significantly	less	likely	to	see	their	GP	for	respiratory	illnesses	or	asthma	events	in	the	period	following	intervention,	as	compared	
to a control group61.	As	a	result,	eligibility	for	the	government	scheme	was	extended	to	low-income	homes	with	people	suffering	from	respiratory	or	circulatory	conditions	and	funding	for	the	research	was	extended	to	2018-2021.
Curation and access: Technological	developments and dependencies on permissions for	secure	and	personal	data	have	shifted	the	emphasis	in	social	sciences,	arts	and	humanities	data	infrastructures	from	data	storage	to	data	access.	This	is	reinforced	by	the	ambition	to	establish	Open	Data	for	research	and	develop	FAIR	data	(Chapter	11).	These	infrastructures	are	evolving	from	being	data	owners	to	being	custodians	and	curators	of	data.	Curatorship	implies	a	number	of	roles:	provision	of	trusted	data	(in	terms	of	provenance	and	ensuring	ethical	data	management),	active	and	expert	curation	of	that	data	(in	both	its	physical	and	digital	formats)	and	provision	of	a	conduit	through	which	the	private	sector	and	other	users	can	access	information.	Bringing	together	expert	curatorship	with	integrated	data	access	can	help	to	realise	the	full	potential	of	dispersed	infrastructures	and	improve	discoverability	across	the	user	spectrum.	
embrace	the	UK’s	diverse	society	and	incorporate	bodies	of	knowledge	from	other	disciplines	(such	as	human	genome	data)	and	public	data	curation	processes	(such	as	citizen	science).	New	tools	and	models	are	required	to	manage	data,	to	develop	participatory	data	infrastructures	and	to	enable	the	development	of	new	modes	of	knowledge	production	and	knowledge	exchange.		
Integrated environments: There	is	a	need	for	the	combination	of	digital	connectivity	with	physical	spaces	to	facilitate	access,	close	study,	incubation	and	experimentation.	Recent	investments	in	the	Creative	Industries	Clusters	and	Audiences	of	the	Future	programmes	provide	an	unrivalled	platform	on	which	to	consolidate	the	UK’s	leading	position	in	research	on	and	with	the	creative	industries.	Future	social	sciences,	arts	and	humanities	infrastructure	needs	to	expand	this	model	beyond	audiovisual	media	and	fashion	across	the	whole	of	the	creative	industries,	building	collaborations	with	other	sectors	including	health,	automotive,	education and tourism. 
Investment	in	technologies,	such	as	machine	learning,	is	needed	to	deliver	step-changes	in	the	ability	of	researchers	to	utilise	existing	large	and	complex	data	types,	e.g.	multimedia	data.	This	will	enable	the	creation	of	persistent	identifiers	for	digital	objects	and	interoperable	frameworks,	systems and related multimedia data automated search	facilities,	all	of	which	could	facilitate	step-changes	in	visualisation	technologies	and	user	interfaces,	advancing	public	access,	communication	and	co-production	of	research.
Adaptation of new technologies: There	are	opportunities	for	infrastructures	to	adapt	new	technologies,	such	as	high-performance	graphics,	quantum	computing,	augmented	reality,	sensor	technologies,	virtual	reality	and	hologram	technology,	as	well	as	mapping	and	geo-referencing	beyond	Geographic	Information	Systems	to	open	up	exciting	ways	to	collect,	create,	distribute	and	participate	in	products	and	experiences.	The	scale	of	digital	facilities	needed	presents	a	formidable	challenge	for	any	single	institution,	making	the	need	for	a	distributed and integrated network essential. 
Our	consultations	over	the	course	of	this	programme	highlighted	a	need	for	a	more	inclusive	and	future-oriented	data	collection	and	curation	infrastructure.	This	needs	to	fully	
68
[Page #72]
the	sector	in	a	way	that	is	analogous	to	the	national	supercomputers.	Future	infrastructure	can build bridges between sectors by working towards	real-time	information	flows	and	combining	different	forms	of	data	with	major	applications	in	public	policy,	public	service	delivery and smart urban design. 
Modelling and simulation: The	sheer	abundance	of	data	has	transformed	social	sciences,	arts	and	humanities,	acting	as	the	catalyst	for	the	development	and	application	of	new	analytics	and	transformative	technologies	to	increase	the	accuracy	and	granularity	of	modelling	and	simulation.	Developing	these	tools	and	techniques	can	lead	to	capabilities	that	serve	
CASE STUDY:  Linked data on individuals and households used to map Greater London’s housing markets and the changing ethnic composition of neighbourhoods
The	Consumer	Data	Research	Centre	(CDRC)	was	established	by	the	ESRC	as	part	of	the	Big	Data	Network.	The	Centre	works	with	consumer-related organisations to make consumer data resources	accessible	to	trusted	researchers.	It	aims	to	make	UK	research	sustainable	in	the	future,	by	maximising	consumer	data,	to	support	consumer-related	organisations	in	innovating	and	to	drive	economic	growth.
of	communities	based	upon	lists	of	given	and	family	names.	Together,	these	software	and	data	resources	are	being	used	by	the	Greater	London	Authority	to	identify	London’s	‘escalator’	housing	markets	(areas	in	which	gentrification	and	associated	house	price	inflation	provide	stepping	stones	for	individuals	to	move	on	to	better	areas)	and	patterns	of	associated	changes	in	the	ethnic	composition	of	neighbourhoods.	Elsewhere,	in	Blackburn,	this	database	is	being	used	to	understand	the	challenges	of	neighbourhood	segregation	in	one	of	the	UK	government’s	Integration	Areas.	More	generally,	the	database	makes	it	possible	to	chart	population	changes,	internal migration patterns and social mobility outcomes	across	the	UK,	at	scales	from	the	local	to	the	national.	The	quality	of	the	linked	data	infrastructure	is	documented	in	the	peer-reviewed literature and aggregate anonymised or pseudonymised extracts are available upon successful	application	to	the	CDRC	Safeguarded	and Secure services.
Researchers	at	the	CDRC	have	created	a	Linked	Consumer	Register	of	almost	all	adults	and	households	in	the	UK	from	1997	onwards,	with	annual	updates.	This	infrastructural	database,	comprising	roughly	1	billion	individual	records,	is	held	in	the	CDRC	secure	data	facility	and	is	being	used	to	better	understand	the	nature	of	social	and	geographical	mobility	across	the	UK.	An	associated	CDRC	collaboration	with	the	Office	for	National	Statistics	has	led	to	the	creation	of	a	free-to-access	software	tool	that	makes	it	possible	to	estimate	the	ethnic	composition	
Map	showing	the	destination	wards	of	internal	migrants	from	Spitalfields	and	Banglatown,	coloured	by	the	most	common	ethnic	group	within	each	flow.	Produced	by	Guy	Lansley,	CDRC,	2019.
69
[Page #73]
such	as	the	Longitudinal	Studies	Review59.  Since	the	publication	of	the	Progress	Report	 we	have	undertaken	further	community	engagement	to	validate	and	develop	the	content	of	this	chapter.	Within	each	of	the	themes	below,	we	present	some	potential	opportunities	for	future	infrastructure	capability	across	the	whole	UK	landscape.	
5.3 Future requirements  and opportunitiesOur	vision	for	the	future	of	social	sciences,	arts	and	humanities	infrastructures	has	been	driven	by	community	engagement,	the	Arts	and	Humanities	Research	Council	(AHRC)	and	Economic	and	Social	Research	Council	(ESRC)	Delivery Plans33	and	other	key	strategic	reviews	
New data infrastructures to inform the major challenges of our time
1
Driving innovationand growth in existinginfrastructures
Future policyenablers
SocSoSocial alsciences,sciencearts andarardts anhumanitieshumtiesmanitthemesthemes
2
5
Maintaining and preservingcultural heritage
4
3
Creative economy
Figure	13.	Social	sciences,	arts	and	humanities	themes	overview.
services	and	other	interactions),	transaction	data	(including	consumer	data	and	transport	usage),	longitudinal	data	(providing	evidence	of	the	causal	impacts	of	social	and	environmental	contexts	on	people’s	choices,	behaviours	and	outcomes	in	later	life)	and	human	behaviour	data.	Maximising	the	potential	value	of	this	 data,	some	of	which	is	sensitive	or	personal,	requires	careful	data	management,	contextual	knowledge	and	complex	linkages	and	analyses,	as	well	as	robust	mechanisms	for	tracking	usage and impact. 
Theme 1: New data infrastructures to inform the major challenges of our timeThe	major	challenges	of	our	time,	from	the	Industrial	Strategy	Grand	Challenges	of	Ageing	Society	and	Clean	Growth	to	social	cohesion	and	productivity,	are	mainly	caused	by,	differentially	affect	and	require	solutions	that	involve	people.	This	requires	an	evidence-based	understanding	of	individuals,	communities,	groups	and	populations,	and	will	require	a	broad	range	of	data	including:	administrative	data	(gathered	by	government	and	other	public	bodies	from	public	
70
[Page #74]
Theme 1: New data infrastructures to inform the major challenges of our time
Subtheme: Health and wellbeing of populations
New	capabilities	would	address	gaps	in	the	current	portfolio,	add	value	by	connecting	and	supporting	existing	capabilities	in	this	area	and	provide	additional	support	to	users.Infrastructure	investments	here	will	complement	those	in	the	‘population	data	for	health	research’	theme	in	the	biological	sciences,	health	and	food	sector	(Chapter	3)	with	opportunities	to	work	jointly	to	support	underpinning	areas,	e.g.	around	the	co-development	of	technologies,	methods	and	tools,	establishing	best	practice,	or	complementarity	of	approaches.
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Population  research	resource
Infrastructure	to	allow	researchers	across	disciplines	to	access	data	from	cohort/longitudinal	studies,	improving	usability	and	discoverability	and	maximising	value	from	existing	investments	in	longitudinal	studies.	A	major	role	for	new	infrastructure	would	be	to	track	both	the	use	and	the	impact	of	such	studies.
New	birth	cohort
The	UK’s	current	longitudinal	studies	have	a	global	reputation,	but	there	is	a	significant	and	growing	evidence	gap	stemming	from	the	fact	that	the	members	of	its	youngest	cohort	study,	who	were	born	at	the	turn	of	the	century,	have	now	reached	early	adulthood.	Scoping	work	is	under	way	to	explore	the	most	effective	way	of	designing	the	next	birth	cohort,	as	are	plans	for	additional	data	collection	from	the	Millennium	Cohort	Study,	to	focus	on	the	transition	from	childhood	to	adulthood.	This	gap	was	highlighted	by	the	MRC	Strategic	Review	of	Cohorts	and	a	new	study	was	recommended	as	part	of	the	Longitudinal	Studies	Review.	This	approach	would	be	closely	aligned	to	the	biological	sciences,	health	and	food	sector	aim	to	develop	a	new	adolescent	cohort.
Developing	long-term,	sustainable	investment in life	course	and	population	research
There	are	opportunities	to	build	on	decades	of	investment	in	the	UK’s	unique	portfolio	of	cohorts,	hosted	by	the	Centre	for	Longitudinal	Studies,	which	would	provide	the	data	required	for	interdisciplinary	research	 to	understand	and	tackle	major	complex	challenges	facing	the	UK	economy,	including:
  Development	and	delivery	of	next-generation	cohort	design	and	
methodology	
  Fostering	international	collaboration	with	a	worldwide	network	of	 
cohort	initiatives	
This	would	develop	and	use	novel	data	collection	technologies	(behavioural	and	biomedical	data)	to	capture	data	on	key	life	transitions.	
Understanding	intergenerational change	across	cohorts
A	series	of	scoping	activities	are	needed	to	understand	intergenerational	change	across	cohorts,	by	enhancing	and	utilising	administrative	data	linkage.	This	was	a	core	recommendation	of	the	Longitudinal	Studies	Review.
71
[Page #75]
Subtheme: Economics, productivity and growth
With	UK	productivity	well	below	that	of	peer	nations,	and	with	an	associated	lag	in	wage	growth,	understanding	and	stimulating	productivity	is	arguably	the	UK’s	biggest	economic	and	social	problem.	Business	and	consumer	data	are	vital	for	understanding	economic	and	productivity	challenges.	As	with	administrative	data,	these	data	types	are	not	generated	for	research	and	need	to	be	carefully	managed	and	prepared	to	be	usable	for	this	purpose.	Once	data	are	available,	powerful	analytic	approaches	can	be	brought	to	bear	to	generate	important	and	meaningful	insights.	Addressing	regional	inequalities,	skills	shortages	and	changing	labour	markets	is	crucial	to	productivity	and	sustainable,	inclusive	growth.	
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Productivity	research	resource
A	UK	Research	and	Innovation	productivity	research	resource	or	institute	would	provide	a	systematic	understanding	of	what	effective	action	is	required	to	address	the	UK	productivity	challenge,	one	of	the	biggest	challenges	facing	the	nation.	This	would	enable	the	collection,	linkage	and	analysis	of	data	that	supports	the	institute’s	lab-based	research	environment. 
Data	linking	within	and	across	firms
Enhanced	capability	to	link	individual	firm-level	data	and	employee-employer	data	would	facilitate	research	into	the	determinants	of	productivity,	including	the	role	of	human	capital.
Subtheme: Boosting social cohesion – understanding values, attitudes and behaviour
Longitudinal	studies,	such	as	Understanding	Society:	the	UK	Household	Longitudinal	Study,	are	core	social	science	data	infrastructures.	These	surveys	involve	tracking	and	gathering	information	from	groups	of	individuals	or	households	over	time	to	create	a	clearer	picture	of	society.	They	increase	in	value	over	time	as	new	waves	of	information	about	their	participants’	lives	are	added	to	what	is	already	known	about	them.	This	enables	a	deeper	understanding	of	people’s	changing	lives	and	attitudes	and	informs	the	development	of	robust	evidence-based	policy	interventions	designed	to	address	social	issues	and	lead	to	improvements	in	people’s	lives.	These	studies	are	complemented	by	cross-sectional	surveys	(which	interview	fresh	samples	of	people	on	each	occasion)	and	gather	information	on	social	and	political	attitudes	to	build	a	comprehensive	understanding	of	attitudes	and	behaviour.	Supporting	new	phases	of	activity	and	enhancing	existing	approaches	by,	for	example,	incorporating	the	capacity	to	access	and	link	survey	data	to	other	forms	of	data	and	use	of	advanced	analytical	tools	would	drive	a	step-change	in	capability.
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Global	social	comparisons
A new global social survey resource would enable access to internationally	comparable	social	surveys,	allowing	high-level	comparative	analysis	and	the	sharing	of	data	across	international	boundaries.	The	detailed	composition	of	the	infrastructure	would	be	subject	to	a	scoping	exercise.	This	would	move	above	and	beyond	existing	surveys	in	the	landscape	by	playing	a	role	in	bringing	surveys	together	in	a	way	in	which	they	are	comparable	(harmonisation)	and	by	being	methodologically	and	geographically	more	ambitious.
Qualitative	longitudinal study
Scope	the	potential	for	ground-breaking	new	qualitative	data	collection	to	complement	longitudinal	quantitative	analysis	in	consultation	with	the	community.	This	would	set	new	standards	for	how	studies	could	be	integrated	and	would	require	innovation	in	machine	learning	and	image	analysis.	This	would	be	applicable	and	add	value	across	quantitative	longitudinal studies.
72
[Page #76]
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches cont.
Understanding	Society waves thirteen	to	fifteen
The	next	phase	of	investment	(waves	thirteen	to	fifteen)	would	capitalise	on	the	most	effective	opportunities	for	innovative	multi-	and	interdisciplinary	scientific	and	policy-relevant	research	by	exploiting	new	and	emerging	technologies	in	data	collection	methods	and	linkage.	It	would	create	unique	opportunities	for	interdisciplinary	research	to	improve	human	health	by	continuing	to	build	and	develop	a	cutting-edge	resource,	combining	biological	and	social	data	over	time.
Globally	networked	election studies
Building	on	the	benchmark	British	Election	Study	would	enhance	and	add	richness	to	the	existing	information	by	drawing	on	global	election	studies	to	understand	how	different	societal	influences	and	attitudes	translate	into	behaviours	at	elections.	This	project	is	currently	being	scoped.
Young	Lives
The	next	phase	of	investment	in	the	Young	Lives	longitudinal	programme	would	build	on	methodological	learning	from	the	original	multi-country	longitudinal	programme	and	deliver	the	data	in	a	number	of	formats,	to	support	a	range	of	audiences	(academics,	funders,	data	managers,	research	managers).
CASE STUDY:  UK birth cohort studies inform guidance on prevention of binge drinking
Researchers	Dr	Barbara	Jefferis,	Professor	Chris	Power	and	Professor	Orly	Manor	used	data	from	the	1958	National	Child	Development	Study	and	the	1970	British	Cohort	Study	to	investigate	the	adult	consequences	of	early	drinking	patterns	among	teenagers	and	those	in	their	early	twenties.	They	found	that	binge	drinking	was	common	among	British	adults	and	that	drinking	levels	in	adolescence	were	significantly	associated	with	problem	alcohol	use in subsequent decades.
social	concerns	in	later	life.	This	was	crucial	information	at	a	time	of	rising	concern	about	the	levels	of	binge	drinking	and	its	societal	consequences.	They	produced	a	report	for	the	Cabinet	Office’s	Strategy	Unit62 and were cited in numerous	Health	Committee	reports.	This	has	gone	on	to	influence	the	government’s	Alcohol	Strategy	for	England	in	2012-1363 and public health	guidance	including	the	National	Institute	for	Health	and	Care	Excellence	(NICE)	guidelines	on	Alcohol-use	disorders	and	prevention64,	and	Draft	Guidance	on	the	Consumption	of	Alcohol	by	Children	and	Young	People	from	the	Chief	Medical	Officers	of	England,	Wales	and	 Northern	Ireland65.
Their	findings	highlighted	the	importance	of	preventing	and	identifying	alcohol	problems	as	early	as	possible	to	prevent	health	and	
yabaxPmorfycnegAYOREEL
i
73
[Page #77]
exploring	these	issues.	There	is	significant	potential	to	drive	a	step-change	in	our	existing	infrastructure	capability,	addressing	consumer	and	business	data,	multilingualism,	health	and	human	behaviour	and	their	influences	on	society	and	the	environment.	Many	of	the	ideas	set	out	in	the	tables	are	relevant	across	multiple	themes.	
Theme 2: Driving innovation and  growth in existing infrastructuresAddressing	regional	inequalities,	skills	shortages	and	changing	labour	markets	is	crucial	to	productivity and sustainable and inclusive growth.	We	can	harness	existing	administrative	data to complement and add value to existing (and	planned)	human	and	societal	data	sets	
Theme 2: Driving innovation and growth in existing infrastructures
Subtheme: Transforming administrative data access and maximising use
There	is	a	wealth	of	administrative	data	held	in	government	departments	and	other	public	bodies	with	enormous	research	potential,	but	access	and	use	present	significant	challenges.	This	data	has	not	been	developed	with	research	in	mind	and	needs	expert	curation,	linkage	and	access	requirements	brokered	with	data	holders.
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Administrative  Data	Research	UK	Phase	II
The	next	phase	of	the	newly	inaugurated	Administrative	Data	Research	UK	(ADR	UK)	would	link	administrative	data	to	support	research	into	income,	working	patterns,	travel	patterns,	education,	health	and	criminal	history	 for	all	who	come	into	contact	with	government	departments	and	 public services. 
A ‘administrative data	spine’	for	longitudinal studies
The	Longitudinal	Studies	Review	recommended	the	development	of	a	benchmarking	‘administrative	data	spine’	of	population	identifiers	with	maximum	coverage	of	the	UK	population.	This	would	address	a	number	of	pressing	strategic	priorities	in	the	development	and	use	of	longitudinal	studies	including:	providing	a	sampling	frame	for	potential	new	studies;	enabling	assessment	of	the	representativeness	and	inclusion	of	existing	longitudinal	studies	and	other	data	sets	providing	a	means	to	address	bias	in	these	data	sets;	and	facilitating	linkage	of	administrative	data	to	longitudinal	survey	data	for	research	purposes.
The	detailed	approach	and	features	would	need	to	be	scoped.
There	is	also	an	opportunity	to	expand	use	across	disciplines	to	add	 value	to	population	studies	within	the	biological	sciences,	health	and	 food	sector.
74
[Page #78]
Subtheme: Analysis and research centres in consumer and business data
Business	and	consumer	data	are	vital	for	understanding	economic	and	productivity	challenges.	As	with	administrative	data,	these	data	types	are	not	generated	for	research	purposes	and	the	data	needs	to	be	carefully	managed	and	prepared	for	it	to	be	usable	for	research.	Once	data	are	available,	powerful	analytic	approaches	can	be	employed	to	generate	important	and	meaningful	insights.
Current	infrastructures	focus	on	the	needs	and	socio-economic	factors	that	affect	the	prosperity	and	wellbeing	of	citizens	in	local	communities	in	an	era	of	global	change.	Programmes	of	work	include	fundamental	and	applied	research	and	an	extensive	integrated	knowledge	exchange	and	training programme.
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
‘Big	data’	innovations:	growing	the	business	and	local government data	research	centres
Creation	of	a	national-level	demonstrator	using	the	development	and	application	of	AI	and	data-sharing	techniques	would	significantly	extend	existing	data	infrastructures	and	their	service	offer.	It	could	enable	them	to	design	and	host	a	platform	to:	
  Develop,	experiment	with	and	apply	advanced	AI	techniques
  Plug-in	primary	or	secondary/derived	data	sets	from	their	partners	to	
present	in	near-real-time	the	outcomes	of	research	and	the	application	of	AI	and	analytics
Subtheme: The future of data access and analysis
Today’s	world	is	increasingly	connected	and	digital,	where	new	forms	of	data	are	generated	via	a	multitude	of	channels	and	devices	on	a	second-by-second	basis.	These	channels	and	devices	include:	hardware	(such	as	smartphones,	tablets	and	other	devices);	software	(such	as	social	media,	videogames	and	digital	art);	and	the	data	that	is	produced	from	user	interactions.	Changes	in	practices	and	technologies	are	influencing	how	we	think	about	data	access	–	users	may	be	much	less	interested	in	how	and	where	data	are	held	and	much	more	concerned	with	how	to	access	the	data.	
This	challenge	applies	to	a	wide	range	of	social	sciences,	arts	and	humanities	disciplines,	including	the	heritage	sector	which	has	identified	the	need	for	frameworks	and	information	management	systems	that	can	facilitate	the	collection,	preservation,	analysis	and	interpretation	of	this	rapid	increase	in	‘born-digital’	objects.	
Another	challenge	is	preventing	infrastructures	from	becoming	obsolete	if	they	are	no	longer	directly	supported	–	if	an	infrastructure,	such	as	a	website	or	database,	is	an	output	of	a	fixed-term	project	it	is	rarely	maintained	as	a	live	resource	after	completion,	rapidly	becoming	undiscoverable.	Infrastructure	that	enables	the	capture	and	analysis	of	this	material	will	enhance	our	understanding	of	the	ways	in	which	digital	technologies	impact	lives	and	our	capacity	to	inform	and	influence	the	future	direction.
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Centre	for	new	 and	emerging	forms	of	data
Consideration	given	to	how	to	address	the	challenges	around	access,	creation	and	analysis	of	new	and	emerging	forms	of	data,	for	instance	through	scoping	for	a	new	infrastructure	focused	on	new	data.
This	could	involve	a	range	of	methodologies,	such	as	AI,	spatial	analysis,	geostatistics	and	a	wide	variety	of	other	disciplinary	perspectives,	to	address	potential	research	questions	on	social	processes	and	human	behaviour,	for	example;
  Population	dynamics	and	societal	change	–	migration,	ageing	
populations,	population	growth	and	welfare/well-being
75
[Page #79]
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches cont.
  Public	health	risks	–	spread	of	communicable	diseases,	lifestyle	 
factors	and	non-communicable	diseases
  Economic	growth,	innovation,	research	and	development	activity	–	
science,	education,	workforce	of	the	future,	global	trade	and	 financial	stability
  Social	and	environmental	vulnerability	and	resilience	–	environmental	
change,	dynamics	of	poverty	and	related	policy	evaluations
The	UK	Data	Service	(UKDS)	is	a	flagship	data	infrastructure	for	the	 social	sciences.	The	next	phase	in	the	development	of	this	service	would	provide	access	to	an	even	greater	variety	of	data	sources,	for	an	even	greater	number	of	users.	Building	upon	developments	in	recent	years,	including	the	International	Data	Access	Network,	the	future	service	would be able to provide secure access to international data sets and be responsive	to	changing	security	standards	of	the	provision	of	sensitive	(individual-level)	data.
Next-generation	data	services:	archives	of	 the	future
This	future	data	service	will	need	to	be	flexible	to	meet	the	changing	demands	of	its	stakeholders	(notably	data	owners/controllers	and	researchers).
The	National	Centre	for	Research	Methods	was	commissioned	to	promote	a	step-change	in	the	quality	and	range	of	methodological	skills	and	techniques	used	by	the	social	science	community.	
Maintaining	methodological	excellence	in	the	social sciences
The	next	phase	of	development	would	enable	us	to	deepen	the	interdisciplinary	and	non-academic	reach	of	the	centre.	It	would	focus	on	widening	the	user	base	outside	of	the	social	sciences	to	researchers	working	in	the	private,	public	and	civil	society	sectors,	putting	the	development	of	new	networks	and	partnerships	at	the	heart	of	the	activity.
New	investment	to	sustain live online digital content
Development	of	a	UK-wide	network	of	sustainable	trusted	repositories	for	digital	data,	integrated	into	the	academic	research	community	and	supported	by	the	promotion	of	digital	skills	and	community	engagement,	would	significantly	enhance	future	discoverability	and	use.		
Including	capability	to	select,	sustain	and	archive	live	online	digital	content	from	past	and	future	research	and	supporting	greater	interoperability	would	ensure	that	the	outcomes	of	individual	projects	are	preserved,	adding greater collective value.
76
[Page #80]
Subtheme: Digital humanities and its future (technologies, methodologies and skills)
Digital	humanities	is	a	rapidly	evolving	field	that	applies	Information	and	Communication	Technologies	(ICT)	to	preserve	digital	artefacts,	making	them	more	accessible	to	users	and	enabling	analysis	and	mining	of	data	in	new	and	previously	impossible	ways.	It	supports	the	creation	of	more	socially	embedded	and	responsive	technologies	that	are	able	to	balance	the	needs	of	researchers,	industry,	the	third	sector	and	the	public.	It	also	facilitates	the	exploration	and	analysis	of	large-scale	historical	and	cultural	data	sets	and	enables	new	ways	of	sharing	and	visualising	the	data.
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Technologies	and	methodologies	for	digital	humanities,	advanced data visualisation  and curation
Significant	opportunities	exist	to	aggregate,	describe	and	analyse	digitised	material.	Establishing	centres	of	excellence	for	the	development	of	new	technologies,	frameworks	and	methodologies	for	collection,	archiving,	analysis	and	interpretation	would	bring	existing	digital	humanities	and	social	science	techniques	together	with	techniques	such	as	AI	and	machine	learning.	
This	would	open	up	experimentation	with:	immersive	data	visualisation	techniques	and	blockchain	technologies,	digital	reconstruction	and	visual	modelling;	mapping/geo-referencing;	remote	data-sharing	and	inquiry,	scanning	and	3D	laser	scanning;	3D	printing	technologies;	and	remote-sensing	and	drone	technologies.
Subtheme: Research in languages and multilingualism
Although	our	world	is	increasingly	mobile	and	interconnected,	fundamental	problems	of	translation	of	languages	and	cultures	inhibit	communication	and	the	effectiveness	of	policy	interventions	both	domestically	and	overseas.	Investment	in	multilingualism	research,	machine	translation	and	corpus	research	(computational	analysis	of	language	and	discourse)	will	enrich	the	evidence	base	for	policy	intervention	and	facilitate	more	effective	implementation.
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Modern	languages	policy and  evidence centre 
A	new	policy	and	evidence	centre	for	the	modern	languages	would	provide	an	important	underpinning	resource	for	researchers,	policy-makers	and	practitioners	to	better	understand	the	multilingual	make-up	of	the	UK	and	the	significance	of	language	to	policy	and	practice	in	areas	such	as	social	cohesion,	security,	trade	and	overseas	development.
Machine	 translation	facility
Infrastructure	(hardware	and	software)	to	support	use	of	AI	and	machine	learning	would	support	the	translation	of	texts	and	ensure	digital	equality	in an area dominated by private corporations.
Common	languages resource infrastructure
Consider	options	to	take	forward	infrastructure	that	would	support	the	recording,	analysis	and	investigation	of	the	structure	and	function	of	languages,	developing	large	corpora	and	linking	them	together.
77
[Page #81]
CASE STUDY:  New insights into ancient Egyptian coffins
Since	2014,	the	Fitzwilliam	Museum	in	Cambridge	has	been	conducting	cutting-edge	interdisciplinary	research	into	its	collection	of	more	than	200	ancient	Egyptian	coffins	and	coffin	fragments.	Bringing	together	a	team	comprising	of	Egyptologists,	conservators,	a	pigment	analyst,	an	expert	in	historical	painting	techniques,	an	ancient	woodworking	specialist	and	a	consultant	radiologist,	alongside	the	application	of	advanced	imaging	techniques	such	as	Computed	Tomography	(CT)	scanning	and	X-radiography,	has	generated	new	insights	into	the	coffins’	construction	and	the	history	of	the	coffins	and	their	owners66. 
CT	scanning	of	the	inside	of	Nespawershefyt’s	coffin,	in	collaboration	with	the	Department	of	Radiology	at	Cambridge	University	Hospitals	NHS	Foundation	Trust	and	the	Medical	Imaging	Group	in	the	University’s	Department	of	Engineering,	revealed	a	hotch-potch	of	new	and	reused	wood,	redundant	joints	and	remnants	of	another	closure	mechanism	under	the	rich	decoration.	Detailed	analysis	of	scan	data	using	software	developed	originally	for	3D	medical	
ultrasound	helped	the	team	understand	how	large	parts	of	a	much	earlier	coffin	lid	and	box	had	been	recut,	refashioned	and	reused	in	the	creation	of	Nespawershefyt’s	coffin.	
Developing	our	understanding	of	reuse	adds	to	and	refines	the	significant	quantifiable	data	that	can	be	derived	from	the	study	of	these	objects.	This	has	led	to	new	interpretation	of	ancient	economics,	social	situations	and	craft	specialisation	over	thousands	of	years.	Through	investigating	the	reuse	of	coffins,	the	team	is	able	to	develop	new	interpretations	of	the	function	of	coffins	within	funerary	rituals	and	the	processes	of	burial	in	ancient	Egypt	and	improving	our	understanding	of	the	materiality	of	tomb	robbery.
Coffin	set	of	Nespawershefyt	(mummy	board,	inner	coffin,	outer	coffin).
78
[Page #82]
Subtheme: Assessing societal attitudes and behaviours on the environment
Climate	change	and	unequal	access	to	health,	wealth,	education	and	resources	are	two	of	the	most	pressing,	long-term	global	challenges.	The	UK	government	has	taken	a	leading	role	in	this	area	through	its	Clean	Growth	Strategy	and	Defra’s	twenty-five-year	plan	for	the	environment.	
Research	at	the	individual,	cultural,	political	and	corporate	level	is	central	to	the	successful	implementation	of	the	social,	structural	and	systemic	changes	required	to	change	attitudes	and	behaviours.	Social	sciences,	arts	and	humanities	infrastructures	have	the	potential	to:	help	us	better	understand	these	issues;	find,	evaluate	and	implement	solutions;	inform	better	choices;	 and increase societal resilience.
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Changes	in	behaviour,	e.g.	around	the	environment
Scope	the	potential	for	existing	social	sciences,	arts	and	humanities	infrastructures	which	hold	relevant	data	to	develop	data	linkages	with	other	data	sets	of	interest	or	develop	new	access	and	analytical	mechanisms	to	understand	and	integrate	this	data.
Global	Biodiversity	Information	Facility
The	Global	Biodiversity	Information	Facility	is	an	international	open	access	facility	that	provides	an	important	evidence	base	on	biodiversity	to	inform	sustainable	development.	There	are	opportunities	for	new	infrastructure	which	would	incorporate	the	UK’s	botanical,	zoological,	palaeontological	and geological collections data.
Environmental and geo-archaeological	databases
Creation	of	fully	digitalised	and	interoperable	archives	of	geo-archaeological	data	would	enhance	our	ability	to	reconstruct	and	understand past environments and climate.
and	existing	synthetic	and	natural	materials	 for	new	product	development.	
Theme 3: Creative economyThe	creative	industries	are	an	undoubted	strength	of	the	UK	economy,	accounting	for	£92	billion	of	Gross	Value	Added	(GVA)	2	million	jobs	and	are	growing	twice	as	fast	as	the	economy	as	a	whole.	This	potential	was	recognised	by	the	government	in	the	Industrial	Strategy,	prioritising	an early Sector Deal67.	The	ISCF-funded	Creative	Industries	Clusters	programme	demonstrates	the	potential	for	adding	future	economic	value	through	geographic	and	sectorally	focused	creative	clusters.	There	are	opportunities	to	build	on	this	to	initiate	a	world-leading	creative	economy	R&D	programme	in	disruptive	areas	where	creative	research	can	provide	significant	added	value	to	other	sectors	of	the	economy.			
While	recent	emphasis	in	cultural	and	design	research	has	been	on	the	digital	environment,	this	needs	to	be	balanced	against	a	need	to	maintain	an	understanding	of	the	physical	world	and	the	knowledge	that	working	with	physical	objects	can	bring.	Familiarity	with	both	physical	and	digital	can	also	lead	to	development	of	new	experiences	creating	new,	blended	products	and	experiences	that	integrate	the	material	with	the	digital	environment.	For	example,	a	student	on	the	AHRC’s	Collaborative	Doctoral	Partnerships	programme	uses	her	knowledge	of	embroidery	and	digital	fabrication	to	‘repair’	and	reconstruct	sixteenth	century	embroidered	garments	in	the	advanced	stages	of	deterioration.	The	technique	breathes	new	life	into	fragile	objects	that	would	otherwise	remain	hidden	from	the	public	and	drives	innovation	in	the	emerging	field	of	e-textiles.	Investment	in	innovative	spaces	and	research	environments	allows	users	to	access	research	objects	and	in-house	expertise	to	incubate	and	test	new	research	methods,	technologies	and	ideas.	
The	design	sector	contributes	7.2%	of	the	UK	industries’	GVA	to	the	economy68	and	the	GLAM	sectors	draw	on	their	collections	to	drive	innovation	in	key	areas	of	the	creative	industries.	For	example,	the	Business	of	Fashion	Textile	and	Technology	Collaborative	Research	and	Development	Cluster,	funded	through	the	Creative	Industries	Cluster	programme,	is	working	in	partnership	with	the	V&A	to	test	new	
79
[Page #83]
CASE STUDY:  Dinosaurs and robots: test beds for immersive technologies 
Advances	in	virtual	reality	and	augmented	reality	help	create	experiences	that	can	bring	science	to	life.	The	Creative	Industries	Clusters	and	Audience	of	the	Future	programmes	are	supporting	a	series	of	immersive	experiences	that	allow	audiences	to	experience	museums	in	new	ways.	
Dinosaurs	and	Robots,	an	Audience	of	the	Future	demonstrator	project,	combines	mixed	reality	technology	and	immersive	theatre	with	new	academic	audience	analysis	to	transform	the	traditional	static	museum	experience	into	a	rich	encounter	where	objects	come	to	life.	Creative	co-directors,	the	Almeida	Theatre	and	immersive	content	studio	Factory	42,	will	create	two	mixed	reality	visitor	experiences	supported	by	scientists	and	curators	from	the	Natural	History	Museum	and	the	Science	Museum	Group.	At	the	Natural	History	Museum,	visitors	will	‘meet’	and	‘interact’	with	a	digital	cast	of	dinosaurs.	At	the	Science	Museum,	it	will	be	robots	and	artificial	intelligences.	Visitors	will	be	immersed	in	a	multisensory,	experiential	environment	where	they	can	shape	their	own	narratives	and	experience	the	work	of	scientists	and	palaeontologists.	
Researchers	at	the	University	of	Exeter,	co-funded	by	Sky	and	the	UK	arm	of	US	spatial	computing	firm	Magic	Leap,	are	measuring	the	impact	on	audiences	to	inform	the	design	of	future	exhibits.	They	are	using	novel	data	retrieval	methods	relating	to:	eye	tracking	and	biometrics;	identification	of	psychological	antecedents	for	positive	visitor	experiences	using	mixed	reality	and	objective	physiological	indicators;	and	identification	of	physiological	markers	to	improve	experience	design	 and personalisation. 
24yrotcaF
80
[Page #84]
Theme 3: Creative economy
Subtheme: Creation of spaces in which innovation can take place 
Technologically	enabled	spaces	are	essential	to	the	growth	of	innovation	and	design	in	the	creative	industries	and	ensure	a	pipeline	of	technological	innovation.	The	heritage	sector	offers	unique,	interdisciplinary	environments	in	which	industry,	creative	practitioners	and	researchers	can	collaborate	to	develop	and	test	technologies	for	new	audience	experiences.	Such	spaces	facilitate	the	development	of	new	paradigms	for	multi-modal,	participatory	research	and	the	public	spaces	offer	opportunities	for	prototyping	new,	blended	audience	experiences.		
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Evidence base for	early-years	pedagogies and skills 
Establishing	a	national	centre	for	play,	creativity	and	skills	would	provide	the	physical	space	and	expertise	to	develop	and	test	early-years	pedagogies	and	build	creative	confidence	through	play	and	interaction	–	both	physical	and	digital	–	with	materials,	objects	and	crafts.	This	could	evidence	and	measure	the	value	of	acquiring	hand-eye	skills	at	an	early	age	with	a	strong	focus	on	transferability	and	‘skilling	for	the	future’.
New	investment	in	technologically	enabled spaces to incubate new technologies	and enable interdisciplinary research
The	creation	of	blended	study	facilities	embedded	in	heritage	institutions	and	storage	facilities	would	enable	researchers,	designers	and	creative	practitioners	to	access	physical	collections,	digitised	holdings	and	complex,	born-digital	objects	such	as	videogames	and	interactive	digital	novels.	Such	infrastructures	could	facilitate	interdisciplinary	scholarship,	offering	opportunities	to	develop	AI	and	new	visualisation	techniques.	They	would	also	create	an	environment	in	which	the	creative	industries,	heritage	sector	and	academia	can	collaborate	to	develop,	prototype	and	user-test	next-generation	immersive	products	and	experiences.	
New	investment	in	sustainable	fashion	technologies
Study,	research	and	analytical	facilities	co-located	with	collections	and	expertise	would	enable	the	development	of	sustainable	fibres	and	textiles	for	the	fashion	industry	and	prototype	their	production.	This	would	incorporate	spaces	for	interdisciplinary	and	collections-led	research.
Investment	for	facilities	to	support	design	and	practice-based	research	
Integrated	technology	facilities	for	innovative	design	and	practice-based	research	would	support	the	creative	economy,	providing	access	to	materials,	including	music,	visual	arts	and	performing	arts.
Life-size	virtual	reality interactivity
Establishing	national	capability	to	enable	creation	and	exploration	of	digital	environments	would	allow	a	different	kind	of	virtual	reality	and	would	create	the	context	in	which	new	kinds	of	research	will	be	conceptualised.	This	would	enable	interactive	research	with	life-size	digital	environments	such	aquaria,	wildlife	locations,	geological,	archaeological	and	historical	sites,	museums	etc.
81
[Page #85]
Figure	14.	Components	of	blended	spaces	environments.
Subtheme: Infrastructure to preserve data and resources for R&D in the creative industries
Access	to	systematically	collected	and	documented	digital	artefacts	such	as	videogames,	interactive	novels	and	social	media	platforms	is	critical	for	research	and	industry-led	innovation.	National	infrastructure	to	preserve	and	enable	access	to	otherwise	obsolete	versions	and	formats,	as	well	as	spaces	for	experimentation	and	product	development,	has	the	potential	to	enhance	the	UK’s	global	competitiveness	in	a	rapidly	evolving	market69.
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
National	creative	industries	research	network
A	national	capability	would	enable	the	archiving,	curation	and	reuse	of	data	and	other	outputs	(physical	and	digital)	from	the	Creative	Industries	Clusters	programme	and	wider	Creative	Economy	programme.
Repository	of	born-digital	artefacts	 and resources
A	national	infrastructure	would	preserve	born-digital	materials	and	data,	e.g.	interactive	novels,	videogames,	social	media	and	digital	art,	and	capture	evolving	versions	and	the	interactive	content	for	reference	 and	research.
Longitudinal	data	and policy and evidence centre 
There	is	currently	a	paucity	of	timely,	detailed	and	longitudinal	quantitative	evidence	to	inform	policy	design	in	the	creative	industries.	This	could	be	addressed	by	building	on	the	Creative	Industries	Cluster	Policy	and	Evidence	Centre	to	create	a	longitudinal	data	repository	for	novel,	local	and	timely	data	on	the	positions,	dynamics	and	evolution	of	the	UK’s	creative	industries and its clusters. 
82
[Page #86]
own	identity,	diverse	cultural	forms	and	heritage.	This	can	empower	them	to	address	social	challenges	such	as	reconciliation	and	reparation	in	the	wake	of	conflict,	modern	slavery	or	mental	health	and	wellbeing.	
Theme 4: Maintaining and preserving cultural heritage The	national	GVA	of	the	heritage	economy	is	estimated	at	£29	billion,	with	heritage	tourism	expenditure	contributing	nearly	£17	billion	in	201770.	Social	benefits,	including	improvements	to	mental	health	and	wellbeing	derived	from	engagement	with	heritage	and	a	sense	of	connection	to	place,	are	increasingly	apparent71. Research	from	Age	UK	reveals	that	creative	and	cultural	participation	is	the	greatest	contributor	to wellbeing in older age72. 
The	success	of	the	heritage	sector	is	dependent	on	research	because	of	its	role	in	identification,	preservation,	interpretation	and	public	communication	of	heritage	assets.	The	UK	heritage	infrastructure	encompasses	tangible,	intangible	and	digital	heritages,	in	museums,	galleries,	libraries,	archives,	Higher	Education	Institutions	(HEIs)	and	historic	environments,	and	a	range	of	global	collections	and	collaborations.	Infrastructure	would	support	sectoral	needs	identified	in	the	Strategic	Framework	for	Heritage	Science	in	the	UK	2018–202374,	led	by	the	National	Heritage	Science	Forum.	
Social	cohesion	can	be	built	through	engagement	with	heritage	but	needs	to	be	supported	through	infrastructures	that	recognise	and	reflect	the	diversity	of	today’s	society73. These	infrastructures	enable	research	that	allows	groups	across	society	to	discover	their	
Theme 4: Maintaining and preserving cultural heritage  
Subtheme: Digitisation and interoperability
Digitisation	of	the	entirety	of	publicly	funded	collections	is	not	currently	feasible.	However,	investment	in	preliminary	scoping	activities	could	establish	the	basis	for	progress	towards	a	more	fully	integrated	and	interoperable	data	infrastructure	with	the	capability	to	search	across	collections.	Digitised	collections	across	different	media	(archives,	large	objects	and	buildings,	books,	manuscripts,	2D	and	3D	art,	digital	collections	and	design	processes	and	other	time-based	media),	will	enable	‘big	data’	studies	of,	for	example,	societal	trends,	infectious	disease	or	transmission	of	skills	through	time	and	space.	Storage	of	visual	and	audio	data	will	require	a	step-change	in	capability	in	terms	of	multimedia	data-automated	search	facilities	and	visualisation	technologies.
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
National	aggregator	for	existing	collections
Building	a	new	digital	repository	or	‘aggregator’	would	enable	connectivity	between	museum	collections	data	(and	metadata	about	digital	assets)	already	online	but	currently	siloed.	It	could	allow	UK	museums	to	aggregate	their	data	to	international	platforms	such	as	Europeana75.  The	aggregator	will	need	to	incorporate	proven	data-gathering	methods	and	the	flexibility	to	embrace	emerging	technologies.
Phased	cataloguing,	digitisation and connecting	of	national collections
Digitisation	of	collections	held	by	publicly	funded	bodies	and	integration	through	an	interoperable	system	would	have	a	transformative	impact	on	research.	The	scale	of	the	undertaking	means	that	feasibility	needs	careful	assessment	through	a	phased	series	of	scoping	projects	on	specific	themes.	These	could	range	across	different	collections	and	address	specific	research	questions	in	their	own	right.	
Creation	of	a	digital	archive	for	the	second	half	of	the	twentieth	century
Creation	of	a	new	sector-wide	linked	data	environment	for	twentieth	century	text	and	audio-visual	collections	would	constitute	a	unique,	open	access	international	digital	research	resource.	This	could	include,	for	example,	the	cataloguing,	scanning,	digitisation	and	optical	character	recognition	of	the	13	to	14	million	pages	of	transcripts	of	translated	BBC	monitoring	broadcasts	from	approximately	sixty	countries	between	1939	and	1989.
83
[Page #87]
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches cont.
Understanding	the	heritage	of	empire	and colonialism
Creation	of	integrated,	digital	resources	from	world	and	colonial	collections,	as	well	as	related	Black	and	Minority	Ethnic	archives,	would	enable	research	on	and	critical	approaches	to	policy	on	race,	equality	 and inclusion.
Video	and	sound	search	facility	
The	development	of	infrastructure	with	the	ability	to	search	for	objects	 and	features	within	audio	and	image	files	would	be	needed	to	underpin	 full	exploitation	of	the	above	opportunities.
Subtheme: Physical storage, conservation and access
Despite	the	growing	importance	of	digitisation	to	the	research	infrastructures	of	the	heritage	sector,	digital	proxies	cannot	replace	originals.	Adequate	facilities	for	storage,	conservation	and	analysis	of	artefacts	are	needed	which	also	facilitate	skills	training	and	public	access.	Physical	and	digital	collections	continue	to	grow	and	appropriate	infrastructure	is	needed	to	accommodate	not	only	current	collections	but	also	those	of	the	future.
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Conservation,	heritage	and	archaeological	science	research	facilities
Conservation	and	heritage	science	facilities	would	provide	physical	spaces	for	bringing	practitioners,	curators	and	scientists	together	to	co-design	interdisciplinary,	multi-modal	research	projects	and	develop	skills	training	in	conservation	and	heritage	science.	These	could	be	embedded	within	or	close	to	collecting	institutions,	historic	sites	and	properties,	and	facilities	to	develop	site-	or	collection-specific	techniques,	technologies,	instruments	and	expertise.	They	could	also	develop	participatory	models	of	research	and	engagement	to	facilitate	citizen	heritage	science	approaches	and	generate	income	through	the	heritage	economy.	
UK	Research	Infrastructure	for	Heritage	Science	(UK-RIHS)
The	European	Research	Infrastructure	for	Heritage	Science	(E-RIHS)	is	a	distributed	heritage	science	infrastructure	offering	integrated	access	to	cutting-edge	facilities	and	expertise,	as	well	as	shared	data	resources.	Establishing	a	UK	node	(UK-RIHS)	would	allow	a	transformation	of	the	UK	interdisciplinary	heritage	science	landscape	through	access	to	these	valuable resources. 
Advanced storage facilities	for	museum	collections 
Phased	creation	of	a	distributed	network	of	advanced	physical	and	digital	facilities	would	transform	access	to	and	search	and	discovery	capability	for	national	collections.	It	would	also	provide	world-class	storage	facilities	for	an	ever-increasing	volume	of	vulnerable	material.	
84
[Page #88]
whereby	designers	ensure	that	their	products,	environments	and	services	address	the	 needs	of	the	widest	possible	audience	and	through	an	infrastructure	that	bridges	the	gap	between	design	and	technological	development	and innovation.
Theme 5: Future policy enablersFuture	public	services	and	policy	will	be	shaped	by	a	series	of	challenges,	including	but	not	limited	to	an	ageing	population,	budgetary	pressures,	adoption	of	new	technologies	and	administrative	uncertainty	surrounding	the	UK	exiting	the	EU.	Many	of	these	challenges	require	complex	multi-partner	solutions	and	it	is	vital	that	these	are	based	on	robust	evidence.	To	ensure	that	innovations	in	policy	and	practice	are	able	to	increase	efficiency	and	effectiveness,	researchers	need	to	be	able	to	access	appropriate	types	of	data	in	timely	and	safe	ways.	Data	provides	the	evidence	base	for	addressing	these	problems,	but	design	is	the	key	mechanism,	translating	research	into	commercial	and	social	innovation.	The	challenges	facing	public	services	can	be	met	through	the	process	of	inclusive	design	
New	and	emerging	forms	of	data	from	smart	and connected devices allow an almost continuous	stream	of	data	to	be	analysed;	new	data	analytics,	including	AI	and	machine	learning,	offer	the	capacity	to	analyse	it.	This	will	see	research	that	previously	described	public	and	behavioural	responses	to	events	or	policy	improving	in	both	response	time	and	granularity.	Infrastructures	have	a	powerful	role	in	enabling	this,	by	providing	access	to	data,	tools	and	expertise	in	both	analysis	and	interpretation.	
Theme 5: Future policy enablers
Next-generation	public	services	are	a	key	strategic	research	theme,	highlighted	in	ESRC’s	Delivery	Plan33.	Providing	evidence	bases	for	policy	and	practice	will	underpin	our	ambitions	in	this	area.	Infrastructures	that	support	researchers	in	the	creation	of	innovative	design	solutions	for	the	delivery	of	public	services	will	be	essential	in	ensuring	that	innovations	in	policy	and	practice	are	implemented	effectively.
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Data	for	policy	innovation
Provision	of	and	access	to	data	to	underpin	innovative	policy	making	could	be	radically	improved.	Scoping	is	needed	to	identify	how	best	to	deliver	this,	for	example	as	a	centralised	activity	or	distributed	set	of	capabilities	within	existing	infrastructures	and	services.
Civil	society	data	partnership
Development	of	new	data-sharing	infrastructures	and	interfaces	as	partnerships	across	civil	society	organisations,	such	as	Non-Profit	Organisations	(NPOs)	and	Non-Governmental	Organisations	(NGOs),	would	enhance	understanding	of	the	voluntary	sector	and	its	role	in	contemporary	society.	This	would	focus	on	transforming	sharing	of	and	access	to	data,	increasing	efficiency	and	maximising	resources.
Design	for	 public services
Creation	of	interdisciplinary	innovation	labs	would	support	the	application	of	service	design	as	a	key	driver	of	service	innovation,	social	innovation	and	user-centred	innovation.	Such	labs	could	provide	the	space	to	engage	in	co-design	with	users	or	members	of	the	public	and	foster	collaboration	through	interaction,	dialogue	and	development	activities.
Future	observatory:	national centre for	design	and	the	Industrial	Strategy
There	are	opportunities	to	explore	the	impact	of	design	on	business,	people	and	their	behaviours	and	to	use	design	to	support	translation	of	research,	developing	prototypes	and	seeking	commercial	partnerships	to	allow	scale-up	for	commercial	and	social	benefit.	This	could	be	realised	through	a	number	of	regionally	located	design	research	and	innovation	centres	focused	on	Industrial	Strategy	Grand	Challenges.
85
[Page #89]
Chapter 6: Environment sector
86
[Page #90]
Innovative infrastructures for environmental science enable clean growth in harmony with our environment, balancing economic and environmental gains and costs. This chapter sets out the drivers, ambitions and step-changes in infrastructure capability planned to keep the UK at the forefront of environmental science, enabling the strongest possible contribution to national and international agenda to find solutions  to unprecedented environmental challenges.
Environmental	researchers	study	the	entire	planet,	from	the	deep	oceans	and	centre	of	the	Earth	to	the	edge	of	the	atmosphere	and	hostile	environments	of	the	polar	regions.	The	sector	has	a	strong	track	record	of	discoveries	that	bring	about	action,	from	identifying	the	hole	in	the	ozone	layer	to	the	observations	and	models	revealing	the	risks	of	climate	change.	Sustaining	planetary	health	depends	on	our	ability	to	understand	how	and	why	our	environment	is	changing	and	to	predict	how	it	may	evolve	in	 the	future.
6.1 Overview of current capabilityToday’s	infrastructures	supporting	UK	environmental	research	and	innovation	include	ships,	aircraft,	satellites,	high-performance	computers,	advanced	modelling	and	simulation,	data	and	sample	archives,	exploration	and	analysis	software	and	lab-based	facilities,	as	well	as	in	situ	measurement	networks,	farm-	and	landscape-scale	experiments	and	collections	such	as	geological	cores/geoscience	data	sets and biological collections. Environmental infrastructures	have	a	global	footprint,	cutting	across	the	whole	Earth	system,	and	are	designed,	supported	and	delivered	in	partnership	with	multiple	international	research	funders	and	users.
Rising	to	the	cutting-edge	science	challenges	of	our	time	and	delivering	environmental,	economic	and	social	solutions	to	real-world	problems	demands	world-leading	infrastructure.	To	tackle	complex	problems	and	drive	scientific	progress,	we	must	facilitate	whole-system	approaches	that	ensure	the	UK	environmental	sector	leads	the	world	in	research	and	innovation	spanning	scientific	disciplines	and	borders.	This	must	be	in	tandem	with	providing	the	tools	for	researchers,	industry	and	other	partners	to	 move	to	increasingly	sustainable	ways	of	conducting	research	and	innovation	through	next-generation	infrastructures.	
The	Landscape	Analysis18	showed	16%	of	UK	infrastructure	cover	an	element	of	environmental	research.	The	overwhelming	majority	of	infrastructures	within	the	environment	sector	(96%)	collaborate	with	other	infrastructures	and	organisations	and	86%	collaborate	internationally.	The	analysis	showed	71%	work	directly	with	UK	businesses	and	58%	work	with	the	public	policy	sector.	70%	of	UK	environment	infrastructures	have	an	expected	lifespan	of	more	than	twenty-five	years.	Others,	such	as	supercomputing	hardware,	require	a	regular	cycle	of	upgrades	to	maintain	a	world-class	capability.
UK	Research	and	Innovation	provides	a	platform	to	deliver	shared	outcomes	from	the	environment	sector,	which	is	spread	across	organisations	such	as	universities,	government	departments	and	agencies,	PSREs	such	as	the	Met	Office,	the	Natural	Environment	Research	Council	(NERC)	and	its	research	institutes,	as	well	as	some	NGOs	and	the	private	sector.	NERC	is	the	major	provider	of	public	research	funding	for	environmental	research	and	maintains,	directly	or	indirectly,	most	of	the	research	infrastructure.	In	the	coming	decades,	UK	infrastructure	will	support	the	community	to	foster	the	partnerships,	resources	and	technology	required	to	work	in	increasingly	innovative and collaborative ways.
The	UK	has	particular	strengths	in:	
  Remote	research	stations,	such	as	the	
Antarctic	stations,	which	require	maintaining	infrastructure	in	geographically	remote	and	harsh	environments
  Large	research	observational	platforms	such	as	the	UK’s	research	ships,	including	the	RRS	Sir	David	Attenborough	due	to	come	into	operation	in	2020	and	the	Facility	for	 Airborne	Atmospheric	Measurements	(FAAM)	research	aircraft
  Large-scale	national	and	international	observing	networks	that	enable	us	to	monitor	change	across	a	range	of	areas	from	atmospheric	to	hydrological	and	ecological	and	timescales,	alongside	curation	of	long-term monitoring records 
87
[Page #91]
  Simulation	and	prediction	of	weather,	 climate and air quality on timescales  from	hours	to	centuries	
affected	by	it.	It	means	harnessing	the	major	technological	opportunities	of	the	future	to	transform	our	existing	capacity,	supporting	the	development	of	next-generation	sensing	and	Earth	observation	capability,	facilitating	whole-systems	approaches	and	capitalising	on	supercomputing	capability	to	glean	new	insights	and	understanding	from	unprecedented	volumes	of	environmental	data.	
  Partnerships	facilitating	contributions	 and	access	to	international	facilities,	 such	as	Earth-observing	systems	with	European agencies and major international field	experiments	
  Autonomous measurements in remote  
This	environmental	infrastructure	will	aim	to	increase	capability	while	driving	down	energy	costs,	in	line	with	Industrial	Strategy	ambitions	for	Clean	Growth	and	commitments	to	reduce	UK	emissions.	
and	inaccessible	environments,	including	novel	sensor	development	and	Earth	observation	for	remote	sensing	and	innovative	field	measurements	
  Environmental	data	services,	underpinned	by	‘big	data’	analytical	technologies	such	as	the	Joint	Analysis	System	Meeting	Infrastructure	Needs	(JASMIN)	computing	platform	
Environmental science is a global endeavour and	its	infrastructure	has	a	global	footprint,	essential	for	ensuring	worldwide	environmental	observation,	monitoring	and	prediction.	This	is	an	opportunity	for	the	UK	to	lead	the	world	in	supporting	infrastructure	for	science-infrastructure	that	is	broad	in	scope,	spans	multiple	areas	of	scientific	enquiry	across	borders	and	is	highly	collaborative,	including	in	ensuring	that	diverse	publics	are	able	to	engage	to	enhance	data	collection	and	research	itself.		
  Analytical observation services including 
carbon-dating	and	isotope	facilities
  Collecting,	storing	and	making	available	
environmental	specimen	stores	such	as	ice	cores,	geological	cores,	DNA	and	collections	of	soil,	plants	and	algae
6.2 Future directionThe	scale	of	the	challenges	and	opportunities	for	the	environment	sector	are	immense.	The	global	pace	of	demographic	change	is	driving	increasingly	severe	and	frequent	environmental	impacts	from	growing	demands	and	pressures	on	environmental	resources.	The	study	of	environmental	science,	including	the	use	of	infrastructure,	is	critical	to	ensure	water,	food	and	energy	security	by	managing	the	Earth’s	resources,	resilience	to	natural	hazards,	mitigation	and	adaptation	to	climate	change,	and	more.	These	challenges	are	coupled	with	opportunities,	due	to	the	increasing	availability	and	quality	of	environmental	data,	advancement	of	digital	capabilities,	fast-paced	development	in	sensing,	automation	and	AI	and	improved	forecasting	skill	from	hours	to	decades.	
The	UK	is	already	at	the	forefront	of	applying	the	latest	technologies	to	Earth	and	environmental	observation,	simulation	and	prediction.	The	sector	is	well	placed	to	use	infrastructure	investment	to	maintain	a	global	lead.	Stakeholder	feedback	on	the	Progress	Report	has	moved	forward	the	themes	and	approach,	including	an	increased	emphasis	on	the	opportunities	presented	by	the	potential	applications	of	‘big	data’,	new	technologies	around	sensing	for	observation	that	are	enhanced	by	mass	participation	in	the	research	process,	computing	and	AI.
Low-carbon exploration and beyond: Exploring our	globe’s	farthest	reaches	is	vital	to	understanding	environmental	change.	next-generation	large	infrastructures,	such	as	research	ships,	have	to	respond	to	the	challenge	of	increasing	capability	while	driving	down	energy	use	and	costs,	supporting	a	reduction	in	emissions	in	line	with	UK	ambitions	for	clean	growth.	For	example,	fleets	of	autonomous	vehicles	can	provide	opportunities	to	survey	greater	volumes	over	space	and	time,	particularly	in	extreme,	remote	and	expansive	geographies,	such	as	the	polar	regions	and	oceans,	without	the	high	carbon	and	other	
The	sector	is	evolving	beyond	identifying	challenges	to	proposing	and	implementing	solutions,	recognising	the	imperative	to	improve	our	understanding	of	the	environment	and	how	it	is	changing	in	order	to	propose	the	correct	interventions.	Delivering	on	this	ambition	relies	on	continued	access	to	high-quality	infrastructure	to	reach,	observe,	model,	simulate and predict our complex environment as	well	as	how	humans	impact	on	and	are	
88
[Page #92]
environmentally	detrimental	footprints	of	existing	research	ships,	stations	and	other	infrastructure.	
Data	science	and	AI	methods	are	required	to	make	sense	of	these	high	volumes	of	complex	information,	which	varies	significantly	in	quality.	By	2030,	systems	will	need	to	seamlessly	connect	different	types	of	observations,	from	ground	sensors	to	satellites,	with	integrated	models	and	simulations	that	can	be	rapidly	accessed by multiple users. 
Sensor and data-collecting networks: Technological	advances	in	low-cost	communications	–	such	as	mobile	phone	networks,	batteries,	miniaturisation	and	embedded computing and data processing –	offer	significant	potential	for	increased	environmental	monitoring.	The	challenge	of	developing sensors and instruments able to capitalise	on	this	is	significant,	including	how	 to	exploit	mass-market	sensors	and	sensors	 that	are	used	for	an	alternative	primary	purpose	for	environmental	information,	to	make	the	most	of	opportunities	presented	by	a	highly	connected,	data-rich	world.	Environmental	observation,	such	as	Earth	observation	from	satellites,	is	vital	to	deliver	new	insights	into	all	areas	of	the	environment	and	equipping	us	with	the	ability	to	detect	change	and	provide	information	over	unprecedented	spatial	and	temporal	scales,	including	our	growing	ability	 to	‘nowcast’	the	environment.		
Building on existing strengths: Responding to future	challenges	and	opportunities	includes	the	need	to	maintain	and	evolve	the	UK’s	existing	high-performing	infrastructure	–	from	the	RRS	Sir David Attenborough	to	the	many	services	and	facilities	that	form	the	backbone	of	UK	environmental	science	–	to	ensure	we	build	on	our	existing	strengths	and	continue	to	deliver	world-leading	capability.	
Building global communities: Addressing many of	the	environmental	challenges	of	the	present	and	future	requires	an	increased	emphasis	on	larger,	multidisciplinary	infrastructures.	This	will	involve	co-locating	environmental	scientists	with	researchers	from	beyond	the	traditional	community,	such	as	engineers,	mathematicians	and	social	scientists,	alongside	maintaining	strong	relationships	with	existing	key	partners	in	the	UK	and	internationally,	such	as	the	UKSA	and ESA on satellite observation. 
The exascale challenge: At	all	scales,	from	the	global	to	the	local,	we	rely	on	innovation	in	environmental	modelling,	simulation	and	prediction	to	ensure	that	society	is	forewarned	and	can	take	action.	The	increasingly	skilful	simulation	of	complex	environmental	systems	is	providing	a	computational	laboratory	for	scientists	seeking	to	understand	how	the	complex	Earth	system	works	and	how	it	is	changing.	However,	the	supercomputing	power	needed	to	further	these	complex	simulations	and	predictions	is	highly	energy-intensive.	Developments	in	hardware	design	are	aiming	to	make	continued	growth	achievable	and	sustainable.	Known	as	the	exascale	challenge,	this	will	require	major	changes	to	the	codes	underpinning	the	current	models	used	to	simulate	and	predict,	an	integral	part	of	the	UK	environmental	science	infrastructure,	which	can	take	years	to	develop	and	test.	E-infrastructure	challenges	and	requirements	are	discussed	further	in	Chapter	8.
Translating	environmental	knowledge	into	actionable advice requires understanding  the	needs	of	and	fostering	connections	to	 the	wider	worlds	of	business,	policy	and	 society.	Environmental	science	infrastructure	needs	to	be	integrated	with	and	facilitate	interactions	across	domains	and	sectors,	including	strengthened	cooperation	between	scientists,	industry,	service	providers	and	 local communities. 
6.3 Future requirements  and opportunities We	have	developed	four	themes	to	use	as	a	framework	to	guide	priorities	for	national	research	and	innovation	infrastructure	to	2030,	encapsulating	the	processes,	activities	and	needs	of	world-leading	infrastructure	in	the	UK	(Figure	15).	These	themes	and	framework	draw	on	significant	stakeholder	consultation,	feedback	on	the	Progress	Report,	and	the	drivers	and	opportunities	for	the	environment	sector.	The	ambitions	of	each	theme	can	be	enabled	through	actual,	digital	and	distributed	laboratories,	capitalising	on	developing	
The data revolution: There	has	been	a	step-change	in	the	availability	of	data	on	the	environment,	bringing	together	information	gathered,	for	example,	from	remote	sensing,	ground-based	sensor	networks	or	genetic	data,	alongside	citizen	science	data	and	data	mined	from	online	sources,	including	social	media.	
89
[Page #93]
technologies	and	data	availability.	Within	the	strategic	framework,	these	themes	are	interconnected,	offering	a	model	of	integrated	infrastructures	where	the	outcomes	and	knowledge	derived	from	research	feed	back	into	the	scientific	questions	that	inform	how	we	continue	to	explore	our	environment	in	the	future.
Within	each	of	the	following	themes	we	present	some	potential	opportunities	for	future	infrastructure	capability.	As	described	in	Chapter	2	these	are	at	different	stages	of	development.	Some	opportunities	need	further	work	to	better	understand	the	requirement,	strategic	importance,	support	within	the	community	and	ability	to	be	delivered,	whilst	others	are	more	developed and could be implemented sooner. 
Exploring our environment: delivered through digital or actual laboratories, enabling clusters or capabilities
Labs for dataanalytics, machine learning and AIInfrastructures for the digitalenvironment
Sentinels of changeInfrastructures for understanding change, from deep oceans to polar regions
4
1
EnvironmentEnvironmentthemeshemes
Integrated infrastructures act as enablers for innovation and cooperation
Labs for interrogating the working of the environmentInfrastructures for whole-systemobservations
Labs for simulation and predictionInfrastructures for next-generation codes and supercomputing
2
3
Outcomes support a healthy, resilient, productive environment,and generate new questions
Figure	15.	Environment	sector	infrastructure	framework.
understand	some	of	the	most	hard-to-reach	and	extreme	environments	on	Earth,	from	the	polar	regions	to	the	oceans,	to	understand	how	rapidly	they	are	changing	and	to	provide	us	with	early-warning	systems	of	dangerous	climate	change.	Responding	to	the	challenge	of	increasing	capability	while	driving	down	energy	use	and	costs,	the	UK	will	support	major	infrastructure	including	the	use	of	autonomous	vehicles,	to	monitor	and	observe	these	sentinels	of	change	across	greater	volumes	of	space	and	time.	
Theme 1: Sentinels of changeWe	live	in	a	time	of	unprecedented	human-driven	environmental	change.	Rising	global	temperatures	are	having	widespread	and	dramatic	impacts	on	the	natural	world,	especially	in	some	of	its	most	remote	and	harsh	environments.	These	far	reaches	of	the	globe	act	as	sentinels	of	change,	where	the	markers	of	global	warming	are	seen	most	clearly,	such	as	the	dramatic	loss	of	Arctic	summer	sea	ice	and	major	biodiversity	losses.	Research	and	innovation	infrastructure	will	allow	us	to	
90
[Page #94]
Theme 1: Sentinels of Change 
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Robotics and autonomous systems	for	the	environment
Investment	in	autonomous	and	remotely	piloted	vehicles	for	air,	land	and	ocean,	miniaturised	sensors	for	use	as	robot	payloads	or	in	sensor	networks,	and	the	machine	learning	and	AI	architectures	to	exploit	fully	the	data	generated.	A	key	element	would	be	to	support	partnerships	with	industry	to	develop	multi-mode	vehicles,	swarm	deployment	and	high-altitude	pseudo-satellites.
Next-generation	global ocean observations using transformative	technologies
Investment	here	could	transform	the	way	we	see	and	understand	our	oceans,	by	allowing	the	UK	to	adopt	and	deploy	a	systematic,	coordinated	and	adaptable	multi-platform	observing	array	as	a	key	component	of	its	national	infrastructure.	An	internationally	networked	group	of	continuous,	basin-scale	platforms	and	sensing	technologies	would	ensure	the	UK	leads	understanding	of	ocean	systems	and	the	technologies	to	deliver	this,	matching	our	scientific	leadership	with	technological	prowess.	This	would	also	capitalise	on	UK	leadership	in	marine	technology	development	and	address	major	gaps	in	our	understanding	of	how	oceans	are	evolving	under	the	pressure	of	human	impact.
Next-generation	global ocean observations platform:	semi-autonomous	ships	
Assess	the	potential	for	a	fifth-generation,	semi-autonomous	research	ship	beginning	with	the	development	of	autonomous	vessels.	With	the	potential	for	exploring	large	parts	of	the	ocean,	it	could	act	as	a	command	platform	for	multiple	swarms	of	unmanned	underwater	vehicles	(UUVs).	The	infrastructure	could	deliver	globally	extensive	measurements,	which	are	key	to	unravelling	the	causes	of	change	in	the	oceans	and	attributing	human-induced	change	relative	to	natural	long-term	variability.
  Infrastructure	to	monitor	the	sea	floor	and	sub-sea	floor,	such	as	a	test	bed	site	to	ensure	that	the	environmental	impact	of	exploiting	the	seabed	is	understood	and	the	risks are mitigated
Other areas to explore:Alongside	these	indicative	approaches,	infrastructure	will	drive	forward	technological	capability	and	expand	the	scale	of	our	global	monitoring.	New	technologies	and	infrastructures	will	also	allow	us	to	reduce	carbon	and	other	detrimental	environmental	footprints.	This	could	be	achieved	through:
  Technologies	(including	molecular	
technologies)	to	understand	changes	in species composition and community structure	to	help	understand	how	environmental	changes	are	impacting	on	critical	species,	for	example	using	e-DNA
  Facilities	for	field-testing	instruments	and	components,	allowing	the	UK	to	become	world-leaders	in	instruments	specified	 to	-50ºC
  Zero	carbon	for	polar	or	remote	research	
infrastructure
  The	development	of	platforms	capable	
of	running	for	long	periods	with	minimal	interference	in	remote	areas	to	support	a	variety	of	geophysical,	atmospheric,	space	weather	and	biological	science
91
[Page #95]
CASE STUDY:  Autonomous fleets: exploring our oceans 
Over	the	past	fifteen	years,	UK	infrastructure	investment	has	created	the	largest	and	most	diverse	fleet	of	robotic	research	vehicles	in	Europe,	including	ten	thousand	items	with	a	collective	value	estimated	at	£20	million.	These	unmanned,	untethered	robotic	vehicles	have	vastly	increased	the	reach	of	scientific	research	in	our	oceans	and	spell	the	future	for	low-carbon	ocean exploration.
(NOC)	and	the	Scottish	Association	for	Marine	Science	(SAMS),	these	vehicles	go	further	and	deeper	than	any	commercial	or	military	capability.	They	can	remain	at	sea	for	many	months,	operating	in	the	most	extreme	and	remote	oceanic	environments	on	Earth,	from	collecting	data	from	beneath	Antarctic	ice	sheets	to	6,000m	below	the	surface.	Two	UK	companies	now	manufacture,	sell	and	export	marine	robotic	vehicles	underpinned	by	this	technology,	attracting	inward	investment	and	international clients.
Operated	from	the	UK’s	research	ships	and	developed	at	the	National	Oceanography	Centre	
CON
Models	used	to	simulate,	predict	and	interrogate	the	workings	of	the	environment	need	information	from	networks	of	sensors	and	instruments.	These	need	to	detect	change	with	increasing	detail	and	accuracy,	from	air	quality	monitoring	to	weather	and	climate	observations.	There	are	opportunities	to	invest	in	major	infrastructure	to	observe	whole	systems	over	time	and	space,	and	which	harnesses	new	technologies	and	developments	such	as	miniaturisation,	new	battery	technology	and	mobile	phone	networks.	There	is	a	real	opportunity	for	the	development	of	low-cost	opportunistic	remote-sensing	techniques	and	the	exploitation	of	mass-market	sensors	and	technologies,	to	utilise	sensors	that	are	deployed	for	an	alternative	primary	purpose	other	than	obtaining	meteorological	information.	Working	with	partners	and	the	public	will	ensure	infrastructures	can	enhance	data	collection,	especially	from	local	communities	where	any	infrastructure	is	based.	
Theme 2: Labs for interrogating  the working of the environmentEffectively	managing	our	natural	resources	relies	on	understanding	the	impact	of	climate	change	on	the	health	of	our	soil,	ecosystems,	coastal	and	marine	environment	and	more.	People’s	health	relies	on	understanding	the	quality	of	the	air	we	breathe,	the	water	we	drink	as	well	as	our	food	security.	We	need	to	understand	the	health	and	resource	potential	of	our	oceans,	including	the	extent	and	impact	of	the	widespread	issue	of	plastics,	to	support	interdisciplinary	solutions	and	understand	their	impact.	Infrastructures	within	the	environment	sector	can	address	global	challenges,	for	example	tackling	AMR	by	supporting	molecular	advances	and	bio-environment	approaches,	in	tandem	with	the	ambitions	outlined	in	Chapter	3.
92
[Page #96]
Theme 2: Labs for interrogating the working of the environment
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Airborne atmospheric	measurements	for	climate,	weather	and	hazard	research
Investment	in	research	aircraft	(FAAM)	would	support	requirements	for	measurements	of	atmospheric	pollution,	radiation,	clouds,	aerosols	and	winds	at	unprecedented	resolutions.	This	would	match	the	needs	of	state-of-the-art	prediction	systems	and	improve	our	capability	for	detection,	quantification	and	attribution	of	air	pollution.
Such	infrastructure	would	exploit	emerging	technologies	including	remote-sensing	techniques,	e.g.	Light	Detection	and	Ranging	(LIDAR),	radar	and	in	situ	state-of-the-art	sensors,	to	enable	cutting-edge	airborne	atmospheric	measurement	and	monitoring.	This	would	underpin	high-resolution	weather	and	climate	models	and	allow	more	realistic	modelling.
It	would	also	enhance	the	UK’s	capability	to	respond	to	atmosphere-based	emergencies	such	as	volcanic	ash,	pollution	incidents,	fires	and	weather	hazards.	
Energy and magma test bed
Creation	of	a	first-of-a-kind	magma	monitoring	observatory	in	Iceland	would	deliver	a	step-change	in	the	ability	to	monitor	magma,	potentially	unlocking	a	new	source	of	geothermal	heat,	and	boost	resilience	and	responses	to	volcanic	eruptions	in	populated	areas.	It	could	also	support	innovation	for	new	drilling	technologies,	sensors	and	robotics.	
Geoenergy	observatories:	geothermal	and	heat	storage	research	and demonstrator facilities
Consider	options	for	geological	test	beds	to	support	research	into	a	range	of	geothermal	and	heat	storage	technologies.	This	could	test	regional	viability	of	low-enthalpy	geothermal	and	heat	storage	technology	and	de-risk	the	supply	chain.	Several	options	exist	for	establishing	demonstrator	facilities:	for	example,	developing	the	existing	UK	Geoenergy	Observatories	(UKGEOS)	site	in	Glasgow	or	nearby	with	additional	boreholes,	and	new	geothermal	research	field	sites	and	hot	sedimentary	aquifer	facilities.
Geoenergy	observatories:	CO2 storage test bed
Consider	options	for	a	CO2	storage	test	bed	site	to	investigate	offshore	geological	storage	of	CO2	as	a	potential	technology	to	support	the	transition	to	a	low-carbon	economy.	It	could	help	de-risk	costs,	ensure	risks	to	the	environment	are	understood	and	mitigated,	and	build	confidence	and	capability	in	CO2 storage.
Landscape	laboratories
Enhanced	integrated	networks	of	sensors	could	be	designed	to	measure	a	range	of	interconnected	physical,	chemical	and	biological	processes	that	define	our	environment	and	that	we	depend	on	for	our	water	and	food	supplies	and	protection	from	natural	hazards.	A	priority	would	be	to	create	a	laboratory	for	flood	and	drought	resilience,	which	could	utilise	the	latest	technologies	and	innovative	approaches	to	collect	measurements	at	appropriate	spatial	and	temporal	scales.	This	would	enable	better	understanding	of	flood	and	drought	risk	and	hence	better	predictions	and	increased resilience.
Intelligent	marine	observing system
Consider	options	for	a	UK	coastal	and	shelf-sea	observing	network	and	centre	of	excellence,	including	building	new	state-of-the-art	sensors	and	autonomous	technology	with	enhanced	connectivity	and	increased	intelligence	(AI).	This	network	of	next-generation	marine	sensors,	deployed	through	a	range	of	marine	autonomous	and	platform-based	observing	systems,	would	provide	real-time	data	generation,	processing	and	analysis.
93
[Page #97]
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches cont.
National	infrastructure	for	climate	and	weather	observations 
Invest	in	observational	infrastructure	to	provide	high-resolution	meteorological	and	climate	measurements	to	develop,	validate	and	initialise	a	new	generation	of	atmospheric	models.	This	would	transform	the	UK’s	ability	to	address	two	of	the	hardest	problems	in	meteorology:	prediction	of	deep	convection	and	the	impact	of	boundary-layer	dynamics	on	local-scale	hazards	and	on	the	larger-scale	atmosphere.	It	would	enable	improved	forecasting	on	a	range	of	timescales	of	high-impact	weather	extremes,	such	as	heavy	rainfall,	high	winds,	hail,	lightning	and	fog.	 It	could	also	act	as	a	test	bed	for	new	technological	developments	in	 novel instrumentation.
Research	infrastructure	to	monitor air pollution
Invest	in	the	creation	of	integrated,	open	access	experimental	air	pollution	infrastructures	that	enable	the	long-term	study	of	atmospheric	change	across	environments	(e.g.	indoor,	urban,	rural).	This	would	enable	detection,	quantification	and	attribution	of	air	pollution	and	provide	science	that	can	deliver	technical,	behavioural	and	policy	solutions	to	reduce	overall	public	exposure,	both	in	the	UK	and	internationally.	This	could	support	new	equipment,	new	field	facilities	to	study	indoor	versus	outdoor	exposure,	technology	development	and	enhancement	of	laboratory	capabilities.		
Research	infrastructure	for	tackling	environmental hazards	and	risks	
Next	generation	environmental	science	infrastructure	needs	to	be	able	to	use	next	generation	technologies.	This	could	be	through	major	upgrades	to	existing	infrastructure	or	fundamentally	new	designs	which	are	flexible,	incorporate	digital	technologies	and	lead	to	a	step-change	in	the	scale	and	speed	of	our	ability	to	predict,	respond	and	mitigate	environmental	hazards.
Detailed	options	would	need	to	be	scoped,	including	matching	leading	business	and	scientific	capability	to	inform	future	innovation.
  Linked	networks	of	observatories	and	mobile	
Other areas to explore:Alongside	these	indicative	approaches,	the	UK	could consider developing its capability inthe	following	types	of	area:
monitoring	systems	allowing	analysis,	detection	of	trends	and	forecasting	of	 natural	hazards
  Facilities	for	measuring	fracture	and	failure	to	enhance	understanding	of	environmental	and	material	science,	contributing	to	fundamental	knowledge	of	geophysical	processes
  A	global	facility	network	enabling	and	
enhancing	greenhouse	gas	observations,	deploying existing instruments to multiple worldwide locations and developing new improved	instrumentation,	to	support	modelling	of	greenhouse	gas	budgets	and	enhanced	understanding	of	global	sources	and	sinks,	and	inform	international	action	to	tackle	climate	change
  Infrastructure	to	enable	improved	national	
resource	and	hazard	analysis	and	management	through	enhanced	geophysical	survey and monitoring capacity
  Remote	sensing	systems	for	urban	
  A	national	community	network	of	soil	behaviour	experiments,	exploiting	new	innovation	and	technologies	that	 generate	data	to	capture	the	impacts	 of	multiple	stressors	on	soil	function	 across	national	landscapes,	to	inform	 future	land-management	mitigation	and	adaptation planning
environmental science
  Remote	sensing	and	observation	of	
whole-system	changes	such	as	in	marine	environments,	for	example	monitoring	the	impact	of	interventions	to	tackle	the	plastic	pollution issue  
94
[Page #98]
  Natural	laboratories	allowing	research	to	take	place	at	the	landscape	scale	over	decades
  Integrated	networks	of	sensors	that	combine	measuring	physical	and	chemical	processes	with	measuring	biological	changes	and	understand	impacts	on	biodiversity	within	 a	particular	habitat	or	at	a	landscape	scale
CASE STUDY:  Earth Observation: our environment from space
Satellite	technology	is	increasingly	integral	to	environmental	observation	and	modelling.	From	long-term	CryoSat-2	data	helping	scientists	track	rapid	changes	in	the	Arctic	to	researchers	at	the	Centre	for	Ecology	&	Hydrology	building	detailed	land	cover	maps	of	the	UK,	Earth	observation	is	essential	to	build	a	clearer	picture	of	our	Earth	systems	and	changing	environment:
  Data	from	satellite-based	remote	sensing,	including	exploiting	ESA-EU	satellite	data,	informs	cutting-
edge	environmental	modelling	and	simulation	through	the	JASMIN	supercomputing	platform
  British	Antarctic	Survey	researchers	have	worked	with	commercial	satellite	companies	to	provide	
high-resolution	images	to	track	whales,	penguins	and	albatross	from	space,	informing	global	conservation	efforts	
  The	ESA	BIOMASS	satellite	will	use	new	technology	developed	at	the	National	Centre	for	Earth	
Observation	to	create	3D	maps	of	the	world’s	forests,	measuring	the	weight	of	the	wood	held	within	them	and	the	height	of	the	trees,	boosting	understanding	of	the	global	carbon	budget
  Satellite	images	from	the	Tropospheric	Monitoring	Instrument	(TROPOMI)	on	the	Sentinel	5-P	satellite	allow	for	high-resolution	assessments	of	UK	air	quality	from	space.	Alongside	surface	measuring	this	provides	critical	information	on	UK	pollution	sources	or	hotspots,	hazardous	pollution	episodes	and	changes	over	time
sdeeLfoytisrevnU/OECNepoPdrahcR
i
i
TROPOMI	TCNO2	(×1015	molecules	cm−2)	for	JJA	in	2018	for	the	following	UK	regions:	(a)	Hampshire,	(b)	West	Country/South	Wales,	(c)	Central	Scotland	and	(d)	Greater	Manchester/Merseyside.	Note	the	difference	in	spatial	scale	between	panel	(a)	and	panels	(b)–(d).
95
[Page #99]
the	UK	access	to	world-class	computational	laboratories	to	probe	the	workings	of	complex	systems and explore potential responses to environmental	change.	Alongside	investment	in	underpinning	e-infrastructure	(Chapter	8),	investment	in	infrastructure	to	simulate	and	predict environmental systems will be needed to ensure	the	most	robust	and	accurate	modelling	of	likely	future	scenarios.	Deriving	the	best	possible	intelligence	from	models	for	simulation	and prediction requires increasing capabilities in supercomputing,	coupled	with	the	development	of	next-generation	codes	and	new	analytical	techniques	such	as	machine	learning	and	AI.	
Theme 3: Labs for simulationand prediction Environmental science is increasingly reliant on	manipulating	data,	with	industry	and	policy users being increasingly dependent on detailed	information	products.	Information	and	insights	gleaned	from	observing	our	environment	inform	sophisticated	models	that	can	simulate	and	predict	environmental	hazards	and	change,	supporting	efforts	to	respond	to	and	mitigate.	This	is	seen	in	major	advances	in	weather	and	climate	forecasting	ability.	The	increasing	skill	of	these	models,	combined	with	big	investments	in	supercomputing,	give	
Theme 3: Labs for simulation and prediction 
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
World-class	capability in supercomputing for	Earth	system	simulation and	prediction,	including	Met	Office	computing	facility	and	NERC/Met	Office	partition	(MONSooN)		
Enhancing	UK	Earth	system	simulation	would	enable	deeper	understanding	of	the	complex	processes	and	interactions	that	determine	Earth	system	behaviour	and	responses	(e.g.	to	increasing	greenhouse	gases).
This	infrastructure	would	deliver	advanced	prediction	systems	across	all	timescales	from	hours	to	centuries,	and	from	the	local	to	the	global,	to	enable	preparedness,	adaptation	and	mitigation	of	environmental	risks.	
Exploiting	simulation	(‘digital	twinning’)	to	provide	large	synthetic	event	sets	for	a	changing	environment	would	enable	better	estimates	of	risk	–	especially	risk	associated	with	extreme	events.
Use	of	very-high-resolution	simulations	(‘computational	laboratories’)	to	advance	understanding	of	processes	and	provide	learning	data	for	AI	and	machine	learning	algorithms	would	improve	parametrisation	for	global	Earth	system	simulation.
Next-generation	codes	for	exascale	computing	platforms
Re-writing	of	major	simulation	codes	(e.g.	the	Met	Office	Unified	Model)	to	exploit	next-generation	computing	technologies	would	deliver	cutting-edge	UK	infrastructure	capability	for	simulating	and	predicting	our	environment,	e.g.	climate	and	weather.
Other areas to explore:Alongside	these	indicative	approaches,	the	UK	could	consider	developing	its	capability	in	the	following	types	of	area:
  Integrated	systems,	exploiting	state-of-the-art	numerical	simulations	and	integrated	monitoring,	to	attribute	specific	environmental	and	Earth	system	changes	to	specific	human	or	natural	drivers
96
[Page #100]
CASE STUDY:  Enabling resilience through hazard prediction 
  Reduction	in	the	£500	million	per	day	cost	 
UK	supercomputing	infrastructure	delivers	improved	accuracy	in	predicting	hazardous	weather	such	as	flooding	and	snow	storms,	protecting lives and saving millions by enabling damage	limitation.	A	partnership	between	NERC	and	the	Met	Office,	the	MONSooN	supercomputing capability and its successor MONSooN	2	facilitate	collaboration	in	climate	and	weather	modelling.	The	partnership	provides	a	common	computing	platform,	post-processing	capability,	a	fast	data	link	and	access	to	data	archives:	
to	the	economy	of	heavy	snow,	and	reduction	in	cold	weather-related	death	among	vulnerable people
  More	accurate	and	earlier	flood	warnings	during	the	winter	storms	of	2013/2014	protected	a	million	homes,	saved	£2	billion	in	UK	insurance	pay-outs	and	avoided	£2.6	billion	of	lost	working	in	London
  Incorporating	atmospheric	measurements	
from	the	UK’s	cutting-edge	research	aircraft	(FAAM)	in	Met	Office	weather	models	has	improved	accuracy	and	helped	the	Environment	Agency,	the	NHS,	local	authorities,	agriculture	and	transport	meet	weather-related	challenges	
  Improved	weather	forecasting	has	saved	£76–127	million	per	year	in	reduction	in	 flood	damage	
Flooding,	27	September	2012:	the	River	Ouse	overflows	following	a	period	of	heavy	rain	and	floods	the	streets	of	central	York,	UK.
97
[Page #101]
to	natural	hazards,	climate	adaptation	and	land-use management on local and national scales. This	infrastructure	could	include	interfaces	with	end-users,	such	as	businesses,	where	there	is	a	need	for	accessible	data	to	help	understand	and	mitigate	against	the	risks	to	supply	chains	and	business	models	from	environmental	change	and	hazards.	
Theme 4: Labs for data analytics, machine learning and AIMaking	effective	use	of	unprecedented	volumes	of	environmental	data	to	deliver	environmental	insight	and	improved	prediction	will	require	major	investment	in	‘big	data’	systems,	data	analytics,	machine	learning	and	AI.	The	information	and	analysis	generated	will	aid	decision	making,	for	example	around	resilience	
Theme 4: Labs for data analytics, machine learning and AI
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Operational-standard	Earth	observation	data-	processing centre
An	Earth	observation	data-processing	centre	would	maximise	the	use	of	Earth	observation	data	and	its	potential	to	be	brought	together	with	other	data	sets.	This	should	build	on	investment	such	as	the	JASMIN	supercomputing	platform	and	harness	partners’	resources	in	a	combined	operation	to	enable	lead	organisations	to	better	predict	long-term	environmental	change	and	natural	disaster	risk.
Network	of	real-time distributed units	for	biological,	chemical	and	physical	data
Consider	the	creation	of	the	UK’s	first	national	network	of	real-time	distributed	novel	monitoring	sensors	and	related	AI	tools	for	biological,	chemical	and	physical	data.	This	would	provide	a	step-change	in	our	ability	to	study	environmental	processes	in	realtime,	over	long	periods,	in	a	holistic	way,	supporting	fundamental	and	applied	research	across	a	range	of	disciplines.	Data	would	be	used	to	aid	decision-making	around	climate	adaptation	and	land-use	management,	providing	a	means	to	prevent	or	reduce	the	impact	of	hazards.
Other areas to explore:Alongside	these	indicative	approaches,	the	UK	could	consider	developing	its	capability	inthe	following	types	of	area:
  Exploring	options	for	interfaces	through	which	businesses	would	be	able	to	understand	the	risk	 to	their	business	model	and	supply	chains	from	climate	change	and	other	environmental	drivers
  Interconnected	networks	with	digital	systems	data	analysis,	where	decisions	and	actions	 could	become	automated	giving	users	access	to	data	to	solve	different,	larger	and	more	multidisciplinary problems
98
[Page #102]
CASE STUDY:  Digitising UK science collections
The	UK	is	home	to	vast	collections	of	scientific	specimens,	from	the	Natural	History	Museum’s	(NHM’s)	diverse	collection	of	80	million	specimens	to	the	8.5	million	plant	and	fungi	samples	from	across	the	globe	at	the	Royal	Botanic	Gardens,	Kew.	UK-wide	collections	provide	a	historical	evidence	base	used	to	address	current	societal	issues	ranging	from	climate	change	and	biodiversity	loss	to	food	security	and	human	health,	and	ongoing	digitisation	will	increase	researchers’	access	to	UK	collections	and	boost	their	impact.	Currently,	20%	of	the	Kew	collections	is	digitised	and	available	online.	Around	4.3	million	of	the	NHM’s	80	million	specimens	are	digitized	and	16.8	billion	collection	records	have	been	downloaded	from	their	data	portal.	
potential	spread	of	Zika	virus	were	created	using	digital	records	of	historical	mosquito	collections.	Mapping	data	about	the	distribution	of	relevant	mosquitoes	against	population	data	has	helped	identify	areas	at	risk	of	Zika	exposure.	Insights	like	these	inform	and	improve	decision-making	and	could	help	to	limit	the	spread	of	the	virus	and	target	those	most	at	risk.	
The	UK	is	now	collaborating	with	European	partners	to	unify	natural	science	collections	into	one	digital	repository	and	open	up	the	potential	of	huge	data	sets	over	time	and	space	to	researchers	worldwide.	The	Royal	Botanic	Garden,	Edinburgh,	and	the	NHM	are	leading	the	UK’s	involvement	in	DiSSCo,	a	multi-partner	international	initiative	that	brings	together	the	collections	of	115	institutions	across	twenty-one	countries,	representing	1.5	billion	specimens	and	more	than	5,000	scientists.	
Digital	collections	enable	new	‘big	data’	research.	For	example,	new	models	of	the	
weK
,
snedraGcnatoB
i
l
ayoR
Digitisation	of	botanical	specimen	samples	from	the	science	collection	at	Kew.	
99
[Page #103]
Chapter 7:  Energy sector
100andreas160578 from Pixabay
[Page #104]
Energy is a multidisciplinary sector spanning the technologies required to generate transport and store energy, the use of energy by industry and the general public and aspects of how energy impacts on the environment. Energy research and innovation, also draws on an understanding of complex systems, robotics, remote monitoring, control and digital technologies and the social sciences to explore the policy, business model and consumer behaviour implications of the energy system. Energy R&D priorities are driven by the need to achieve the UK’s 2050 net zero target and clean growth by providing low- carbon, affordable and secure energy for the UK.
Growing	UK	income	while	cutting	greenhouse	gas	emissions,	alongside	the	provision	of	support	for	affordable	energy,	is	at	the	heart	of	the	Clean	Growth	Strategy45,	which	sets	out	the	actions	needed	to	cut	emissions,	increase	efficiency	and	help	lower	the	cost	of	energy	to	consumers	and	businesses.	As	part	of	these	goals,	the	UK	Industrial	Strategy	seeks	to	support	“automotive,	aerospace	and	construction	industries	to	increase	their	share	of	global	markets	as	they	shift	to	clean	energy	sources	and	efficient	new	materials…to	lead	the	development	of	new	markets	in	areas	such	as	smart	energy	systems	and…	the	use	of	renewable	biological	resources	from	land	and	sea	to	produce	food,	materials	and	energy”.	In	support	of	this,	the	government	has	announced	Sector	Deals	for	the	offshore	wind76	and	the	nuclear77	sectors,	the	Industrial	Strategy	Clean	Growth	Grand	Challenge,	as	well	as	being	the	first	major	economy	in	the	world	to	pass	a	net	zero	emissions	law.	
and	e-infrastructure	sectors.	The	Landscape	Analysis	reflects	this	with	53%	of	physical	sciences	and	engineering	infrastructures,	44%	of	environment	sector	infrastructures	and	46%	of	e-infrastructures	and	data	infrastructures	indicating	strong	links	to	the	energy	sector.
In	the	last	fifteen	years,	there	has	been	a	growth	in	investment	in	energy	R&D	and	associated	infrastructure,	as	clean	energy	has	become	a	priority	and	the	industry	has	expanded.	In	our	Landscape	Analysis,	82%	of	energy-focused	infrastructures	are	less	than	fifteen	years	old.	
The	current	infrastructure	is	balanced	between	an	academic	and	industrial	focus	with	50%	declaring	a	balanced	user	base,	27%	being	more	discovery-focused	and	23%	being	commercially	driven.	The	applied	nature	of	energy	infrastructure	is	exemplified	in	the	offshore	renewable	industry,	which	increased	its	installed	capacity	to	over	8GW	in	2018	from	almost	nothing	in	2008.	This	rapid	increase	was	made	possible	by	investment	in	facilities	such	as	the	Energy	Technologies	Institute	and	the	Offshore	Renewable	Energy	Catapult.	These	facilities	have	helped	develop	and	prove	the	technologies	and accelerate installation.
The	UK	is	well	placed	to	take	advantage	of	the	economic	opportunities	with	a	broad	range	of	low-carbon	industries,	a	strong	research	base	and	support	for	innovation	and	excellence	in	the	design	and	manufacturing	of	leading-edge	technology.	It	is	estimated	the	UK	low-carbon	economy could grow by 11% per year between 2015	and	203078. 
The	UK	has	been	building	infrastructure	capability	in	many	key	areas	such	as	offshore	renewables,	batteries	and	nuclear.	We	are	starting	to	build	capability	in	areas	such	as	hydrogen;	however,	there	remain	some	critical	capability	gaps	such	as	alternative	fuels	and	solar	power.	Much	of	the	capability	lies	in	universities,	dedicated	institutions	such	as	UKAEA	and	the	National	Nuclear	Laboratory	(NNL)	or	technology	developers	such	as	the	Catapults.	There	is	also	significant	analytical	capability	in	multidisciplinary	infrastructure	such	as	Diamond.	Most	energy	R&D-focused	infrastructures	are	largely	publicly	funded	and	the	majority	of	development-	and	deployment-	focused	infrastructures	are	industry-funded.	Where	there	are	more	nascent	markets,	such	as	carbon	capture	and	storage	(CCS),	there	are	
The	major	public	sector	funders	for	energy	research	and	innovation	in	the	UK	are	BEIS	and	UK	Research	and	Innovation.	Several	UK	Research	and	Innovation	councils	support	research	and	innovation	programmes	in	energy,	predominantly	EPSRC	but	also	ESRC,	BBSRC,	NERC,	STFC	and	Innovate	UK,	reflecting	the	cross-cutting	nature	of	the	challenge79.
7.1 Overview of current capabilityMuch	of	the	underpinning	research	and	innovation	that	supports	work	in	the	energy	sector	is	provided	by	infrastructures	across	the	landscape,	particularly	those	from	the	environment,	physical	sciences	and	engineering	
101
[Page #105]
parts	of	the	sector	that	require	government	support	for	higher	TRL	activity	to	prove	and	de-risk	the	technology.	The	majority	of	these	energy	infrastructures	(73%)	have	a	strong	e-infrastructure	requirement	and	63%	see	e-infrastructure	needs	becoming	more	important	in	future	years.
the	regulator	can	allow	them	to	market.	Alongside	the	development	of	technology	options,	the	wider	policy	and	social	context	must	also	be	considered.	This	creates	a	need	for	development,	testing	and	certification	capability.	
Not	all	innovation	is	about	technical	innovation	or market innovation. Resource availability  and	cost	is	also	important.	For	example,	the	search	for	cheap	and	abundant	materials	to	replace	expensive	rare-earth	materials	can	 have	a	significant	impact	on	the	economic	feasibility	of	renewables	and	energy	storage.	State-of-the-art	materials	science	research	 and	innovation	infrastructure	will	be	needed	 to	address	these	challenges.	
The	UK	has	particular	strengths	in:	
  Fusion:	the	UK	is	host	to	the	Joint	European	Torus	(JET),	the	UK	Mega	Amp	Spherical	Tokamak	(MAST)	and	associated	R&D	capability	at	the	fusion	Materials	Research	Facility	and	Remote	Access	in	Challenging	Environments	facility	
  Fission:	through	the	NNL,	Dalton	Cumbrian	Facility	and	National	Nuclear	User	facilities.
The	scale	and	pace	of	the	transition	to	a	low-	carbon	energy	system	makes	future	research	and	innovation	infrastructure	requirements	difficult	to	predict.	New	and	different	types	of	infrastructures	are	needed	and	the	number	of	users	who	require	access	will	increase.	Potential	future	technologies	also	need	to	be	properly	researched,	but	which	should	be	prioritised?	Resource	limitations	will	always	make	it	challenging	to	fully	support	all	options.	The	current	model	of	R&D	in	the	energy sector supports underpinning science with	strong	industry	engagement.	Where	advances	are	made,	government	and	industry	support	is	focused	towards	developing	these	underpinning	ideas	further.	The	energy	sector	has	been	a	significant	beneficiary	of	recent	Industrial	Strategy	funding	where	development	infrastructures	have	been,	or	will	be,	quickly	built,	e.g.	the	Faraday	Institution.	
  Energy systems:	for	example,	through	the	
Energy	Systems	Catapult	
  Offshore renewable energy:	through	the	
Offshore	Renewable	Energy	Catapult,	the	Coastal,	Ocean	and	Sediment	Transport	laboratory,	the	FloWave	Ocean	Energy	Research	Facility	and	the	European	Marine	Energy	Centre	(EMEC)
The	UK	is	also	building	capability	in	energy	storage	(e.g.	the	Faraday	Institution)	and	 energy	materials	research	(e.g.	the	Sir	Henry	Royce	Institute).	
7.2 Future directionThe	key	drivers	for	the	UK	energy	sector	will	continue	to	be	affordability,	security	of	supply	and reduced carbon emissions. Energy will continue to be a key government priority as part of	the	Industrial	Strategy	and	in	its	capacity	of	monitoring	and	regulating	the	sector.	The	ability	of	the	sector	to	respond	to	government	priorities	will	therefore	remain	paramount,	but	without	supportive	research	and	innovation	infrastructure	a timely response may not always be possible.
The	UK’s	commitment	to	clean	energy	innovation	is	supported	by	its	membership	of	the	Mission	Innovation80	programme	which	has	objectives	that	include	doubling	state-led	energy	R&D	by	the	year	2020	and	the	building	of	roadmaps	to	assist	in	innovation	efforts.	The	programme	has	identified	eight	critical	areas:	Smart	Grids,	Off-grid	Access	to	Electricity,	Carbon	Capture,	Sustainable	Biofuels,	Converting	Sunlight,	Clean	Energy	Materials,	Heating	and	Cooling,	and	Renewable	and	Clean	Hydrogen.	The	UK	co-leads	on	Carbon	Capture	and	Heating	and	Cooling,	and	is	heavily	involved	in	most	of	the	other	themes.	The	priority	areas	map	well	onto	the	research	infrastructure	needs	identified	in	this	report,	though	the	UK	has	strategic	interests	that	Mission	Innovation	does	not	cover,	such	as	nuclear	fission	and	fusion.	
The	highly	regulated	nature	of	this	sector	is	critically	important	to	future	infrastructure	needs. Almost no energy generation technologies	can	be	commissioned	without	either	certification	of	the	technology	(e.g.	nuclear)	or	permissions	for	installation	(e.g.	offshore	renewables).	This	means	new	energy	technologies	and	their	impact	on	the	overall	energy	system,	the	environment	and	customer	base	need	to	be	thoroughly	understood	before	
102
[Page #106]
The	UK	has	a	breadth	of	infrastructure	capability	but	consultations	over	the	course	of	this	programme	have	identified	areas	where	additional	infrastructure	investment	is	needed	to underpin and develop certain core energy technologies.	In	addition,	although	there	is	good	collaboration	between	existing	facilities,	more	could	be	achieved	by	building better connections between	them	and	new	collaborative	projects	to	create	distributed	national	capability	rather	than	duplicating	capability	in	new	single-site	centres.	
for	low-carbon	energy	technologies,	the	replacement	of	rare	and	expensive	materials	with	cheaper	and	more	abundant	ones,	improved	efficiency	of	manufacturing	processes	and	end-of-life	management	of	energy	technologies.	
There	is	potential for greater data-sharing and cyber-physical demonstrators	that	could	be	achieved	via	use	of	Open	Data	platforms,	cyber-physical	skills	and	tools,	along	with	‘big	data’	technologies.	Such	facilities	could	help	overcome	challenges	associated	with	operation,	management	and	product	development,	as	well	as	challenges	associated	with	resilience	and	reliability	of	the	energy	system.
Due	to	the	level	of	uncertainty	around	the	future	energy	landscape,	it	is	necessary	to	maintain a minimum capability in a broad suite of technology options,	whilst	focusing	on	key	areas	as	they	become	viable	possibilities.	If	this	broad	capability	is	not	maintained	then	the	UK	will	not	be	able	to	respond	quickly	to	any	global	breakthroughs	or	shifts	in	energy	markets.	A	systems-level	understanding,	i.e.	how	technologies	integrate	across	the	network	and	interact	with	the	market	and	environment,	will	also	be	needed	to	inform	both	regulatory	decisions	and	overarching	policy.	
There	is	a	strong reliance on e-infrastructure in	the	energy	sector	to	support	research	and	innovation	on	operational	challenges,	system	resilience,	identification	of	vulnerabilities	in	the	cyber	and	physical	infrastructure	of	the	energy	system	and	mitigation	of	threats.	Collecting	data	from	end-users	and	energy	appliances	also	represents	a	huge	opportunity	for	the	UK.	Such	data	can	enable	analysis,	which	informs	policy	and	product	development,	supports standardisation and improves system management	and	operation.	In	addition	to	the	cross-sector	computational	and	e-infrastructure	requirements	outlined	in	Chapter	8,	this	sector	will	need:	
Stakeholder	feedback	on	the	Progress	Report	reinforces	our	initial	findings	and	key	messages.	There	is	a	need	for	further	large-scale initiatives similar	to	the	Faraday	Institution	and	significant	national	research	laboratories	around	the	world	such	as	the	National	Renewable	Energy	Laboratory	in	the	USA.	Many	of	the	themes	described	here	require	large	demonstrators	of	multi-vector	energy	systems,	following	the	example	of	the	Integrated	Transport	Electricity	Gas	Research	Laboratory	(InTEGReL),	and	include	capabilities	for	multidisciplinary	research	and	innovation.	Creating	these	larger-scale	activities	is	particularly	important	in	the	energy	sector	where	problems	are	inherently	multi-	and	interdisciplinary.	The	potential	for	a	step-change	in	capability	lies	in	the	integration	of	individual	research	areas	into	the	overall	energy	system.	Large-scale	initiatives:	enable	 a	critical	mass	of	research	and	innovation	activity;	increase	quality,	volume	and	discipline	reach;	and	can	be	directly	informed	by	the	 needs	of	multiple	stakeholders	from	business	and government.
  Open	access	national	databases	of	technical	
data,	demographic	data	and	behavioural	 data	for	demonstrators/laboratories	to	 couple	cyber	and	physical	aspects	of	the	Energy sector 
  National	real-time	simulation	capability	with	increased	computational	power,	pooled	resources	(e.g.	real-time	and	digital	simulators)	and	a	focus	on	the	energy	sector.	This	could	also	include	national	coordination	of	access	to	infrastructure	and	an	open	access	data	platform	similar	to	ERIGrid	(the	European	Research	Infrastructure	supporting	Smart	Grid	Systems	Technology	Development,	Validation	and	Roll	Out	project)	which	connects	the	European	Smart	Grid	infrastructure.	This	would	support	communication	between	existing	and	future	facilities	and	enable	enhanced	testing	and	validation	of	the	concepts	developed	in	 the	sector.
Research	into	reducing the environmental impacts	of	energy	technologies	is	increasingly	important.	This	includes	the	mining	of	materials	
103
[Page #107]
Within	each	of	the	following	themes	(Figure	16),	we	present	potential	opportunities	for	future	infrastructure	capability.	As	described	in	Chapter	2	these	are	at	different	stages	of	development.	Some	opportunities	need	further	work	to	better	understand	the	requirement,	strategic	importance,	support	within	the	community	and	ability	to	be	delivered,	whilst	others	are	more developed and could be implemented sooner.	Where	possible	and	cost-effective,	use	or	participation	in	facilities	that	already	exist	internationally	may	be	the	most	effective	approach.	
7.3 Future requirements  and opportunities Due	to	the	applied	nature	of	much	energy	research	and	innovation,	a	significant	amount	of	the	infrastructure	needs	identified	in	this	exercise	and	captured	in	the	following	themes	are	at	higher	TRLs.
Support	for	maintaining	existing	research	and	innovation	capability	remains	a	high	priority	and	many	of	the	options	for	additional	capability	build	on	or	bring	together	existing	facilities.	Given	the	costs	involved,	the	energy	sector	will	evolve	slowly	over	the	next	thirty	years.	However,	the	CO2	reduction	challenges	that	the	UK	faces	require	that	low-carbon	options	are	available	sooner	rather	than	later	and	the	facilities	and	infrastructure	to	deliver	the	low-carbon	options	will	be	needed	even	sooner.	Likewise,	energy	infrastructure	lifecycles	need	to	be	long	to	ensure	that	regulators	have	test	infrastructure	capable	of	supporting	their	activities	and	that	industry	has	a	training	ground	for	its	future	staff.	
The	most	beneficial	infrastructure	investments	will	be	dependent	on	the	UK’s	future	energy	system.	As	this	is	not	clearly	known	the	opportunities	described	here	represent	the	breadth	of	possible	needs	which	will	change	if	specific	energy	generation	or	transmission	options are abandoned. 
Whole energy systems
1
Carbon captureand storage (CCS)
Fuel cells and hydrogen
2
7
EnergynerEnergysectorectsectorthemesthemes
Nuclear energy
3
6
Energy storage
Renewable energysources
Alternative fuels
5
4
Figure	16.	Energy	Sector	themes	overview.
and	the	energy	market,	to	provide	evidence	for	policymakers,	regulators	and	energy	providers.	As	the	UK	energy	system	transitions	to	become	low-carbon	and	more	decentralised,	a	clear	understanding	of	how	all	the	different	elements	interact is vital. Systems modelling work in universities,	through	several	recent	programmes,	has	begun	to	bring	together	parts	of	this	
Theme 1: Whole energy systems (including energy demand and power distribution networks) Whole	energy	systems	research	specifically	considers	multi-vector	energy	systems.	It	brings	together	the	different	elements	of	an	energy	system,	such	as	technology	options,	policy	and	regulatory	landscape,	how	energy	is	used	
104
[Page #108]
complex	system,	such	as	at	the	UK	Energy	Research	Centre,	the	Centre	for	Energy	Systems	Integration	and	InTEGRel.	However,	fully	understanding	the	system	requires	significantly	enhanced	capability	to	digitally	monitor,	control	and	optimise	the	operation	of	each	individual	asset,	each	energy	vector	and	the	overall	energy	system	itself,	while	also	considering	human	
behaviour,	weather	uncertainty,	environmental	restrictions,	security	and	safety.	The	need	to	decarbonise	heating,	which	generates	around	40%	of	UK	CO2 emissions81,	is	also	a	critical	challenge	for	the	UK.	Analysis	of	this	complex	problem will also require interdisciplinary systems-level	understanding.
Theme 1: Whole energy systems
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Centre	for	energy	analysis:	integration	of	energy	whole	systems modelling
Invest	in	better	integration	of	nationally	important	energy	models	to	foster	interdisciplinary	research	across	the	cyber	and	physical	elements	of	a	multi-vector	energy	system.	This	could	be	through	creation	of	a	new	centre	for	excellence	or	through	enhanced	connectivity	of	existing	centres.	
Research	facility	for	the	decarbonisation	of	heat,	to	reduce	the	carbon	footprint	of	domestic	heating
Consider	options	for	a	single-	or	multi-site	facility	that	would	offer	flexible	demonstrators	to	develop	the	three	main	heat	options	(electrification,	repurposing	for	hydrogen	and	district	heating).
of	lower	energy	density	and	therefore	a	greater	volume	will	need	to	be	pumped,	possibly	at	higher	pressure,	in	order	to	achieve	the	current	energy	levels	delivered	by	natural	gas.	Lifecycle	analysis	research	is	needed	to	determine	the	most	cost-effective	method	of	generating	and	using	hydrogen.	For	example,	is	it	Steam	Methane	Reforming	(SMR)	coupled	with	CCS	and	burning	in	combined	heat	and	power	boilers,	or	is	it	electrolysis	coupled	with	combined	heat	and	power	fuel	cells?		
Theme 2: Fuel cells and hydrogen Hydrogen	is	considered	a	promising	pathway	to	enable	a	low-carbon	economy,	since	it	can	be	used	in	heating,	transport	and	power	applications,	either	by	combustion	or	with	fuel	cell	technologies.	Hydrogen	could	also	replace	methane	in	gas	networks	although	significant	modification	to	the	gas	infrastructure	would	be	required.	Hydrogen	storage	is	also	possible	on	a	seasonal	scale,	enabling	surplus	renewable	energy	generated	in	the	summer	to	be	used	for	generating	hydrogen,	which	can	be	stored	until	winter	when	demand	is	much	higher.	Such	inter-seasonal	storage	is	more	difficult	and	expensive	to	implement	with	batteries.	If	the	UK	considers	hydrogen	to	be	a	viable	option	for	a	future	energy	system,	then	support	for	research	and	innovation	infrastructure	will	be	needed.	
Fuel	cells	could	also	be	essential			technologies	within	the	hydrogen	energy	pathway.	There	remain	significant	challenges,	including	improvement	to	performance,	reliability,	robustness	and	reduction	of	cost	by	2025–2030.
The	indicative	approaches	below	could	be	taken	forward	in	isolation,	focused	on	particular	challenges	or	combined.	As	with	many	of	the	energy	challenges,	research	on	this	theme	is	connected	to	parallel	work	on	other	key	technologies.	For	example,	SMR	should	not	be	done	if	CCS	is	not	addressed	and	the	potential	for	using	cheap	hydrogen	in	the	gas	grid	also	requires	research	on	how	the	existing	grid	and	appliances	might	be	adapted	to	cope.	
There	are	several	time-limited	research	programmes	currently	active	in	this	area:	the	SUPERGEN	hydrogen	and	fuel	cells	consortium,	Hy4Heat	and	HyDeploy.	Our	consultations	identified	the	need	for	sustained	facilities	to	support	investigation	of	the	impact	of	hydrogen	on	the	current	systems	and	develop	new products and solutions. Replacing natural gas	with	hydrogen	will	affect	materials,	seals,	lubricants	and	combustors.	Hydrogen	is	also	
105
[Page #109]
CASE STUDY:  Energy Systems Catapult facilitates local area energy planning
The	importance	of	local	area	energy	planning	has	been	highlighted	by	the	government	in	its	Clean	Growth	Strategy.	However,	there	is	currently no structured planning process to establish	a	long-term	view	of	how	local	energy	systems	will	need	to	be	transformed	to	deliver	a	low-carbon	future.	The	Energy	Systems	Catapult	(ESC)	has	piloted	a	new	whole	system	approach	with	Newcastle,	Bury	and	Bridgend:	aims	to	achieve	this	by	bringing	together	local	and	national	government,	network	operators	and	other	stakeholders	to	agree	an	efficient,	least-cost	solution	for	meeting	emissions	targets82. 
system	together	including	heat,	electricity,	transport,	supply	chains	and	digital,	physical,	market	and	policy	structures).
Through	the	pilots,	local	authorities,	energy	network	operators	and	other	key	local	stakeholders	investigated	future	local	energy	scenarios83	to	help	inform	innovation	projects	and	long-term	planning	of	energy	system	transformation.	The	ESC	is	now	looking	at	how	to	scale-up	local	area	energy	planning	across	the	UK.	
The	ESC	is	an	independent,	not-for-profit	centre	of	excellence	that	collaborates	with	industry,	academia	and	government	to	overcome	the	systemic	barriers	of	the	energy	market.	It	exists	to	unleash	the	potential	of	new	products,	services	and	value	chains	required	to	achieve	the	UK’s	clean	growth	ambitions	as	set	out	in	the	Industrial	Strategy.	With	more	than	170	expert	staff	based	in	Birmingham	and	Derby,	they	work	with	innovators	from	companies	of	all	sizes	to	develop,	test	and	scale	their	ideas.	
The	project	found	no	single	approach	to	decarbonising	the	energy	system	could	be	applied	nationwide,	with	each	local	area	requiring	a	unique	mix	of	technologies	and	networks.	ESC’s	analysis	also	showed	how	the	decarbonisation	of	heat	could	be	achieved	for	less	than	15%	above	the	cost	of	decarbonising	electricity	alone	by	adopting	a	whole-system	approach	(i.e.	considering	all	aspects	of	the	
.
devresersthgir
ll
A
.irsE©
thgirypoC
.irsEyberaw
tfos®SGcrAgnsudetaerC
I
i
Illustrative	example	of	a	spatial	energy	plan	developed	via	Local	Area	Energy	Planning.
106
[Page #110]
Theme 2: Fuel cells and hydrogen
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Centre	for	the	study	of	hydrogen	use	and	safety	of	devices
Options	range	from	a	product-testing	centre	that	enables	certification	of	new	devices,	TO	more	substantial	activity	focused	on	developing	new	devices	with	a	role	in	independent	certification	to	support	UK	manufacturers.			
A	facility	to	develop	bulk	production	of	low-carbon,	low-cost,	resilient	hydrogen
One	or	more	low-carbon	hydrogen	production	demonstrators,	probably	with	electrolysis,	would	be	needed	to	demonstrate	that	hydrogen	can	be	produced	and	supplied	to	the	commercial	market	at	a	competitive	cost.
A	research	centre	into	the	use	of	hydrogen	in	the	gas	grid,	as	an	admixture	or	as	100%	hydrogen
A	centre	for	R&D	into	re-purposing	the	current	gas	infrastructure	(TRL	5–8),	combustion	(TRL	6–8),	fuel	cell	research	(TRL	6–8)	and	gas	storage	(TRL	3–6)	would	facilitate	research	to	support	the	transition	from	methane	to	hydrogen.	This	could	be	combined	with	the	first	or	fourth	fuel	cell	and	hydrogen	challenge	described	in	this	table.
A	centre	to	research	and	develop	the	underground storage of	hydrogen
To	store	large	quantities	of	hydrogen	inter-seasonally,	a	facility	or	laboratory	could	be	commissioned	to	study	hydrogen	storage	and	distribution	systems	equipped	with	measurement	instrumentation	coupled	with	an	array	of	boreholes.	This	could	be	part	of	a	broader	subsurface	research	capability	that	also	looks	at	CCS	and	geothermal	energy.	
A	research	institute	for	fuel	cells	for	the	improvement	of	performance	and	reduction	of	cost
Consider	options	for	an	R&D	facility	to	address	the	remaining	challenges	that	prevent	the	wider	uptake	of	fuel	cells	and	research	and	develop	fuel	cells	technology.
A	centre	to	facilitate	the	transition	from	 a natural gas economy to a hydrogen	economy
Decision-makers	need	a	better	understanding	of	what	a	hydrogen	economy	could	look	like.	A	new	research	hub	would	assess	the	various	hydrogen	technology	options	and	possible	pathways	that	could	be	implemented	to	replace	natural	gas	with	hydrogen	in	the	UK.	This	could	be	linked	to	action	taken	under	Theme	1.
107
[Page #111]
Consultation	with	the	community	highlighted	two	areas	of	importance:
Theme 3: Energy storage Energy	storage	is	an	important	technology	to	support	the	balancing	of	supply	and	demand.	It	is	often	described	as	an	enabling	technology	for	renewable	energy	as	it	enables	storage	of	surplus	renewable	energy	at	times	of	high	generation	and	low	demand	that	can	then	be	released	when	demand	is	high.	Energy	storage	therefore	increases	the	flexibility	of	energy	systems,	but	at	increased	overall	cost.	There	 are	many	ways	to	store	energy:
  The	need	to	couple	short-term	storage	such	
as	compressed	air	with	renewable	generation	to	help	smooth	variations	in	generation	 and demand
  The	need	to	study	the	interactions	of	users	with	the	various	energy	storage	options	in	a	‘living	laboratory’	situation;	this	should	encompass not only localised electricity storage	but	also	thermal	storage	and	could	consider	the	technical	flexibility	of	storage	and	associated	costs,	comparing	static	versus mobile energy storage applications which	have	different	research	needs
  Electrical storage  Thermal	storage  Chemical	storage	(see	hydrogen	and	
alternative	fuels	themes)
  Kinetic	storage
Research	into	advanced	materials	is	critical	for	the	energy	sector	as	well	as	more	broadly	across	the	landscape	(Chapter	1).	This	research	is	applicable	to	all	energy	themes,	but	has	been	captured	here	given	the	specific	needs	identified	within	the	energy	storage	theme.	
Recently,	there	has	been	much	emphasis	on	electrical	storage	for	transport	with	the	creation	of	the	Faraday	Institution.	However,	there	remains	a	need	to	improve	efficiencies	of	small-scale	mobile	storage	thermal	storage	and	in	developing	kinetic	storage	systems,	such	as	compressed	air,	flywheels	etc.	Chemical	storage	is	addressed	in	Theme	2:	fuel	cells	and	hydrogen.	
Theme 3: Energy storage
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
A	‘living	laboratory’	for	energy	storage	integration and local generation systems
To	develop	new	energy	systems	and	understand	how	people	interact	with	them	requires	real-world	studies.	Creation	of	a	‘living	lab’	at	scale	and	in	different	environments	(urban,	sub-urban,	mixed	and	industrial)	would	enable	such	studies.
	This	could	also	support	the	study	of	social	aspects	of	energy	storage,	such	as	large-scale	consumer	studies,	to	better	understand	how	people	interact	with	energy	systems.	Alternatively,	this	could	be	considered	as	part	of	Theme	1.
Large-scale	offshore	renewable	energy storage demonstration facility
Consider	options	for	facilities	to	complement	the	existing	offshore	renewable	energy	test	facilities	at	the	Offshore	Renewable	Energy	Catapult.	This	could	comprise	of	a	wind	turbine	test	facility	where	integrated	energy	storage	technologies	can	be	tested	to	demonstrate	their	ability	to	store	surplus	electricity	thermally,	kinetically,	chemically	or	in	batteries.
Emerging/new	materials or technologies
New	materials	research	is	important	across	the	research	and	innovation	landscape	(Chapter	1).	An	energy	materials	research	centre	could	be	part	of	a	larger,	cross-sector	capability.	The	energy	component	would	focus	on	synthesis,	characterisation	and	testing	of	new	advanced	materials	and	could	research	new	bulk	manufacturing	methods.
108
[Page #112]
CASE STUDY:  Demonstrating a whole-systems approach to UK energy use
In	2017,	29%	of	the	UK’s	electricity	came	from	renewable	sources,	but	electricity	only	accounts	for	around	20%	of	the	UK’s	energy	use.	We	must	also	decarbonise	transport	(around	40%	of	energy	use)	and	heat	(around	30%	of	energy	use).	A	whole-systems	approach	to	integrated	electricity,	gas	and	heat	networks	offers	us	 the	potential	to	rapidly	deliver	a	resilient,	low-carbon,	least-cost	energy	system.	However,	 there	are	many	technical,	commercial,	regulatory	and	safety	research	questions	which	need	to	 be addressed. 
energy	technologies,	strategies	and	processes	which	bring	transport,	electricity	and	gas	into	one place84.	Once	completed,	the	facility	will	build	on	the	unique	co-location	of	an	electricity	distribution	system,	a	gas	distribution	hub,	a	gas	distribution system control room and an ‘energy village’	of	occupied	residential	properties.	The	energy	village	will	collaborate	with	and	complement	the	work	being	undertaken	by	the	£34	million	ISCF/EPSRC	Active	Building	Centre	(ABC)	project	for	which	Newcastle	University	is	a partner.
The	Integrated	Transport	Electricity	Gas	Research	Laboratory	(InTEGReL)	is	a	fully	integrated	whole	energy	systems	development	and	demonstration	facility,	providing	a	space	for	industry,	academia,	SMEs	and	government	to	come	together	to	explore	and	test	new	
Through	collaboration	with	industry	and	academia,	InTEGReL	plans	to	break	down	traditional	barriers	between	gas,	electricity,	water	and	transport	sectors	to	better	utilise	their	assets	to	deliver	a	more	secure,	affordable,	low-carbon energy system. 
skrowteNsaGnrehtroNybdecudorP
Consultation	with	the	renewable	energy	community	identified	three	areas	where	new	capability	could	have	a	significant	impact:
Theme 4: Renewable energy sources Renewable	energy	sources	have	a	vital	role	in	securing	UK’s	targets	for	reduced	CO2	emissions;	two	of	the	three	possible	scenarios	for	the	UK	government	to	meet	2050	carbon	targets	involve	increasing	the	share	of	renewables	in	the	energy	system.	This	importance	to	the	UK,	coupled	with	worldwide	growth	in	the	use	of	renewables,	means	investing	in	research	and	innovation	infrastructure	has	the	potential	to	generate	significant	economic	benefit.		
  New	solar	energy	devices,	exploiting	the	UK’s	lead	in	materials	technologies	and	specifically	materials	for	Photovoltaics	(PV),	e.g. perovskites
  Environmental	impact	of	offshore	renewable	
energy	installations,	to	ensure	facilities	are	placed	at	the	best	sites	for	maximum	efficiency	and	minimum	impact	on	the	 marine environment
There	has	been	much	investment	in	renewable	energy	centres	in	recent	years,	especially	in	offshore	renewable	energy.	These	investments	have	helped	underpin	the	significant	growth	in	wind	power	capacity	in	the	UK	over	the	past	 ten years.
  Development	of	UK	geothermal	potential:	this	is	an	almost	unexploited	resource,	but,	little	is	known	about	its	potential,	long-term	reliability	and possible environmental impacts 
109
[Page #113]
Theme 4: Renewable energy sources
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Solar	energy	scale-up	facility	to	support	the	development	of	new	Photovoltaic	(PV)	technologies
A	demonstration	facility	would	aid	development	of	new	PV	technologies	where	the	UK	is	in	a	leading	position.	This	could	take	the	form	of	a	national	centre	for	low-cost	printed	PV	that	supports	the	distributed	research	community	in	the	UK	by	taking	newly	discovered	structures	or	production	techniques	and	developing	them	for	full	manufacturing	scale	and	installation.
A	facility	for	understanding	large-scale	tidal	stream/wind/wave	energy	extraction and its interaction	with	the	environment
A	large	laboratory-scale	wind/wave/current	combined	basins	and	measurement	system	would	bridge	the	current	capability	gap	between	small-scale	wave	tanks	and	full-scale	at-sea	sites.	Alongside	this	fully,	instrumenting	current	at-sea	sites	would	enable	state-of-the-art	testing	and	development to take place.
Geo-fluids	research	centre to investigate the	development	of	UK	geothermal	potential 
Explore	options	for	building	on	the	current	UKGEOS	facility	to	include	geothermal	heat,	for	example	through	a	medium-	to	large-scale	demonstrator	capable	of	fundamental	research	on	geothermal	energy	 co-production,	possibly	coupled	with	oil	and	gas	production.	
This	could	link	to	work	on	the	underground	storage	of	hydrogen	(see	Theme	2)	and	the	subsurface	laboratory	for	CO2 injection and storage  (see	Theme	7).
CASE STUDY:  European Marine Energy Centre (EMEC)
in developing innovative renewable energy technologies	through	the	provision	of	purpose-built,	accredited	open-sea	testing	facilities	sited	in	the	harshest	of	marine	environments.	EMEC	offers	independently	verified	performance	assessments	of	the	devices	tested	at	its	grid-connected	test	sites,	as	well	as	technical	verification	of	devices	and	subsystems	to	satisfy	reliability,	survivability	and	performance	targets.		
Established	in	2003,	EMEC	is	the	world’s	leading	facility	for	demonstrating,	testing	and	verifying	wave	and	tidal	energy	converters	(technologies	that	generate	electricity	by	harnessing	the	power	of	the	sea).	Having	hosted	twenty	companies	from	eleven	different	countries	(including	E.On,	Scottish-Power	and	Scotrenewables	Tidal	Power)	with	thirty-two	prototypes	so	far,	more	marine	energy	devices	have	been	trialled	at	EMEC	than	at	any	other	site	in	the	world85.
Beyond	device	testing	and	demonstration,	EMEC	has	worked	on	over	one	hundred	R&D	projects	across	the	sector	looking	at	marine	energy	sub-systems,	components	and	infrastructure.	During	the	last	three	years,	EMEC	has	given	focus	to	energy	storage	using	hydrogen,	pioneering	the	development	of	green	hydrogen	from	onshore	wind	and	tidal	energy.	Offering	demonstration,	technical	and	commercial	support,	EMEC	is	now	also	supporting	the	development	of	floating	offshore	wind.	The	development	of	EMEC	has	had	a	positive	impact	regionally	and	nationally,	having	accelerated	wave	and	tidal	energy	development	in	the	UK,	as	well	as	generating	a	GVA	to	the	UK	economy	of	£284.7	million	and	creating	over	4000	jobs.
Based	in	Orkney,	Scotland,	EMEC	helps	developers	to	reduce	the	time,	cost	and	risk	
CorPower	C3	WEC	deployment	at	EMEC	Scapa	Flow	site.
edeKn
i
l
il
oC
110
[Page #114]
  Liquid	hydrocarbon	derived	from	CO2   Alternative	fuels	for	fuel	cells	(ammonia,	
Theme 5: Alternative fuels Reduction	of	greenhouse	gas	emissions	in	the	transport	sector,	including	road,	rail,	aviation	and	shipping,	can	be	achieved	by	switching	to	low-carbon	energy	sources,	including	non-fossil	liquid	fuels.	These	fuels	are	varied	in	origin	 and	include:
formic	acid,	etc.)
Biofuels	are	a	ready	substitute	for	liquid	fossil	fuels	and	in	theory	could	produce	quick	reduction	in	CO2	emissions.	However,	there	are	unanswered	questions	on	the	full	carbon	lifecycle	analysis,	the	use	of	land	for	food	versus	fuel	and	what	the	source	biomaterial	should	be.	
  Biofuels	  Hydrogen	(considered	in	the	Theme	2)
Theme 5: Alternative fuels
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Alternative	fuels	R&D	centre
A	central	coordinated	hub	focused	on	identifying	the	options	for	alternative	fuels	would	lead	to	a	more	substantial	effort,	similar	to	the	Faraday	Institution,	and	could	take	a	broad	approach	to	studying	alternative	fuel	technologies	and	assessing	their	viability.	This	could	be	focused	on	a	single	alternative	or	could	be	expanded	to	a	centre	that	covers	all	options.
Fusion	energy	is	also	likely	to	play	a	role	from	2050	onwards	and	research	undertaken	today	will	be	critical	in	delivering	this	longer-term	goal.	The	UK	is	a	globally	leading	nation	in	the	development	of	fusion,	hosting	the	JET	facility	and running a parallel domestic development programme,	MAST.	Recent	government	investments	in	fusion	facilities	have	begun	to	build	the	national	research	infrastructure:
Theme 6: Nuclear energy  In	this	section,	nuclear	energy	includes	both	fission	and	fusion.	Both	technologies	have	common	requirements	and	unique	challenges.	
Fission	is	recognised	by	the	UK	government	as	having	an	important	role	in	achieving	clean	growth	as	acknowledged	in	the	recent	nuclear	Sector Deal77.	However,	the	sector	faces	several	technological	challenges:
  The	Remote	Applications	in	Challenging	Environments	(RACE)	facility	at	Culham	 which	researches	robotic	access	to	radioactive	environments	for	maintenance	and decommissioning purposes
  To	build	the	capacity	in	design	and	
manufacturing	to	deliver	next-generation	nuclear	technologies	(including	Gen(III)+,	Gen	IV,	small	modular	reactors	(SMRs)	and	Advanced	Modular	Reactors	(AMRs)	
  The	Materials	Research	Facility	develops	
  To	reduce	the	costs	of	electricity	from	 
new	materials	for	use	in	fusion	and	fission	reactors
nuclear	fission	
  To	design	and	deploy	nuclear	energy	systems	
  Hydrogen-3	Advanced	Technology	(H3AT),	a	tritium-handling	facility,	will	provide	the	capability	to	handle	demo-plant	levels	of	fusion	reactor	fuels	
that	can	deliver	flexible	heat	and	power	
  To	safely	decommission	the	current	fleet	of	reactors	and	dispose	of	the	waste	safely
  The	Fusion	Technologies	Facility	
Recent	investments	in	fission	infrastructure	that	have	been	made,	or	are	being	scoped,	include:	
  The	Spherical	Tokamak	for	Energy	Production	
–	the	first	phase	of	the	work	to	produce	a	concept	design	for	fusion	energy	production	is	under	way.	This	project	will	build	on	the	work	of	the	MAST	facility
  The	ISCF	challenge	in	advanced	 
modular reactors 
  Phase	two	of	the	National	Nuclear	User	
Facility	(NNUF)
  A	thermal	hydraulics	research	facility
111
[Page #115]
Complementary	research	and	innovation	challenges	between	fission	and	fusion	energy	research	are	mostly	in	areas	like	robotics	(removing	the	need	for	human	intervention),	remote	monitoring	and	materials	science.	Other	generic	challenges	include	the	development	and	manufacturing	of	future	fuels,	minimising	and	managing	waste,	plant	decommissioning,	regulation,	public	acceptability,	new	plant	design,	manufacture	and	operation,	environmental	impact and geological waste disposal. Alongside 
these	common	challenges	are	a	range	of	specific	questions	focused	on	fission	or	fusion.
Information	on	future	research	requirements	has	been	investigated	by	the	Nuclear	Innovation	Research	and	Advisory	Board86. As well as technological	challenges,	there	are	opportunities	for	social,	economic	and	policy	research	to	understand	the	societal	challenges	of	nuclear	energy,	public	understanding	of	issues	and	how	the	UK	could	deliver	a	transformative	shift	to	clean	growth.		
Theme 6: Nuclear energy
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Expanding nuclear engineering capability	through	a	centre	of	excellence	
Explore	potential	for	a	centre	of	excellence	in	nuclear	engineering.	This	should	complement	and	possibly	include	an	expansion	of	the	Nuclear	Advanced	Manufacturing	Research	Centre	(NAMRC).	Such	a	centre	would	enable	multidisciplinary	nuclear	energy	engineering	to	support	the	UK	new-build	programme.	Additionally,	demonstration	sites	could	be	commissioned	in	conjunction	with	the	proposed	nuclear	development	programmes,	also	supported	by	the	work	of	the	NAMRC	and	Catapults.	This	centre	could	also	include	wider	cost	reduction	R&D	in	reactor	and	site	construction.		
Nuclear	decommissioning research	centre
Facilities	for	handling	and	analysing	active	materials	would	enable	development	and	scale-up	of	newly	developed	techniques.	This	could	include	facilities	to	design	and	develop	waste	minimisation,	treatment	and	management	technologies	in	both	active	and	non-active	environments.	This	is	a	critical	issue	for	the	planning	of	new-build	programmes	in	both	SMRs	and	AMRs.
Research	centre	for	fuel	requirements	 for	future	reactors
Developing	dedicated	facilities	to	research	and	test	the	fuels	of	future	reactors,	especially	accident,	tolerant	fuels,	would	help	maintain	and	grow	the	UK’s	advanced	fuel	capability.	This	is	important	for	both	existing	and	future	reactors,	in	both	civil	and	defence	applications.
Spherical	tokamak	for	energy	production	(STEP)
Taking	spherical	tokamak	studies	through	to	the	next	development	phase	would	require	a	large	fusion	demonstration	reactor	to	develop	the	technology	needed	to	generate	electricity.	
The	first	phase	of	the	STEP	programme	will	develop	the	spherical	tokamak	approach	to	produce	a	concept	design	for	the	production	of	affordable	fusion	energy.	The	first	year	of	this	work	is	currently	under	way.
Thermal	hydraulics	research	centre	 for	reactors
A	dedicated	facility	for	thermal	hydraulics	research	and	testing	would	support	the	design	and	development	of	new	reactors.	Such	a	facility	would	need	to	cover	one	or	more	of	the	following	areas:	pressurised	water,	molten	salts,	liquid	metal	and	advanced	gas.	These	are	areas	of	interest	for	code	validation	of	SMRs,	AMRs	and	any	future	advanced	Pressurised	Water	Reactors	(PWRs).	This	facility	is	in	the	initial	scoping	stages.
Centre	or	research	institute	for	advanced reactor development
New	facilities	that	underpin	design	capability	to	support	UK	ambitions	for	new	nuclear	build	would	enable	the	informed	assessment	and	development	of	future	reactor	designs,	their	regulation	and	operation.
112
[Page #116]
However,	technical	challenges	remain.	CCS	is	costly	and	not	highly	efficient.	Estimates	suggest	between	25%	and	30%87	of	the	energy	in	fossil	fuels	would	be	needed	to	capture,	transport	and	pump	CO2	underground,	leading	to	an	increased	demand	for	fossil	fuels.	Separation	technology	is	also	not	fully	efficient,	capturing	90%88	of	the	CO2,	which	means	there	will	still	be	some	emissions.	Given	these	challenges	there	are	opportunities	for	infrastructure	to	support:	
Theme 7: Carbon capture  and storage (CCS) CCS,	along	with	the	parallel	research	area	of	carbon	capture	utilisation	and	storage,	enables	decarbonisation	of	fossil	fuels	by	capturing	and	permanently	sequestering	the	exhaust	CO2.	CCS	can	also	play	a	role	in	enhancing	the	performance	of	oil	and	gas	recovery	wells.	CCS	could	assist	in	the	production	of	hydrogen	from	natural	gas	by	capturing	and	sequestering	the	carbon	from	methane,	with	the	hydrogen	then	used	as	a	clean	energy	vector.	It	has	been	estimated	that	these	technologies	could	be	applied	to	mitigate	a	significant	amount	of	the	UK’s	carbon	emissions.	The	UK	is	strongly	placed	to	lead	in	CCS	technologies	with	significant	potential	for	offshore	storage	of	CO2 in decommissioned oil and gas wells.  
  Decarbonising	energy-intensive	industries	
where	alternative	fuels	would	be	difficult	such	as	steel	manufacture,	or	industries	where	CO2 is	a	product	of	the	manufacturing	process	such	as	cement	production	
  Studying	how	CO2	would	behave	in	a	
geological	store	as	it	is	uncertain	how	long	CO2	would	remain	underground	or	how	host	rock	would	react	if	large	volumes	were	to	 be injected
Theme 7: Carbon capture and storage
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Research	institute	for	decarbonising	heavy	industry
Consider	options	for	a	network	of	coordinated	facilities	for	demonstrating	next-generation	capture	and	utilisation	technologies,	as	well	as	optimising	amine	scrubbing,	at	a	scale	of	1–10MWe	equivalent.	This	would	act	as	a	bridge	from	small	pilot	plants	to	full-scale	demonstrators	and	could	also	cover	emerging	next-generation	capture	technologies	at	a	smaller	scale.	These	can	be	developed	through	pilot	plants	operating	at	a	scale	of	around	50–500kWe.	
Subsurface	laboratory	for	CO2 injection and storage
A	demonstration	facility	with	CCS	as	part	of	an	integrated	energy	system	would	enable	exploration	of	key	implementation	challenges.	This	could	take	the	form	of	a	‘borehole	lab’,	with	an	array	of	boreholes,	instrumentation	and	research	capability.
113
[Page #117]
Chapter 8: Computational and e-infrastructure sector
114
[Page #118]
We are witnessing a revolution in research and innovation. Modern research is still founded on the basic principles of observation, experiment and theory, but computational and data analytic approaches are now central to all research sectors. Consequently, the whole UK research and innovation community is increasingly reliant on the UK’s research e-infrastructure89,90,91 (high-end computing, large-scale data storage and high-capacity data networking).
The	UK’s	e-infrastructure	needs	to	deliver	across	the	research	and	innovation	sector,	for	example:	
8.1 Overview of current capabilityThe	e-infrastructure	sector	consists	of:	computational	resources	to	conduct	modelling,	simulation	and	data	analysis;	large-scale	data	storage	facilities;	and	the	network	infrastructure	to	enable	data	to	be	stored,	accessed	and	shared.	This	diverse	ecosystem	(Figure	17),	which	ranges	from	top-end	supercomputers	to	smaller	local	capabilities,	delivers	the	required	technical	diversity.	Exploiting	this	computational	hardware	requires	a	diverse	range	of	software	tools	for	modelling,	simulation	and	data	analysis.	
  Large-scale	experimental	facilities	such	as	the	LHC,	Diamond,	the	SKA	and	the	Hinxton	genomics campus will produce increasingly large	volumes	of	complex	data,	requiring	a	corresponding increase in computational resources	to	maximise	the	benefits	from	the	data	they	generate	
  The	mining	of	large	and	complex	data	sets	has	the	potential	to	transform	research	areas;	for	example,	earlier	chapters	described	opportunities	to	generate	new	insights	from	social,	historic	and	medical	data	
The	UK’s	computational	e-infrastructure	can	be	broadly	categorised	as:	
  National	facilities	such	as	Advanced	
  Highly	sophisticated	computational	
Research	Computing	High	End	Resource	(ARCHER),	DiRAC	and	the	Hartree	Centre
simulation	now	plays	a	critical	role	in	the	interpretation	of	results	in	a	number	of	fields
  E-infrastructure	at	experimental	facilities	 
  The	UK’s	e-infrastructure	also	underpins	
that	support	the	research	that	facility	users	are carrying out
innovation,	where	the	development	of	new	products can be accelerated by combining real-world	and	simulation	approaches92  
  Data	facilities	and	resources	to	support	
specific	research	areas	
E-infrastructure	is	now	essential	for	almost	all	disciplines	and	research	and	innovation	sectors.	The	diverse	nature	of	applications	requires	a	diversity	of	provision	to	meet	the	requirements	of	the	different	fields.	It	also	needs	to	support	and	develop	in	tandem	with	the	increasingly	pervasive	application	of	AI	and	machine	learning,	with	opportunities	for	each	technology	to	drive	advances	in	each	other.
  E-infrastructure	at	research	centres	and	institutes	to	support	their	own	research	programmes,	which	may	require	access	to	 the	three	other	classes	of	e-infrastructure	
This	ecosystem	provides	a	diverse	range	of	resources	covering	high-performance,	high-throughput	and	data-intensive	computing.	It	also	provides	resources	at	different	scales,	ranging	from	large-scale	national	facilities	to	smaller-scale	local	facilities,	reflecting	the	diverse	needs	of	the	research	and	innovation	community.	It	supports	both	pure	research	needs	(for	example,	ARCHER	and	DiRAC)	and	industry-focused	innovation	(for	example,	the	Hartree	Centre).		
115
[Page #119]
T I O N A L   R ESEARCH - Superco
A
R
E
m
p
P
utin
O
g
o f t w a r e  Infrastructu&   P rojects
S
r
e
GENERCSPEC
g
n
N E T  Network
J A
i
t
upmoctuphgu
>100,00Academic& IndustrialUsers
I
Acces s
CCPs
I
F
C IFIC - High-thro
I
C
-
d
a
t
a
-i
n
t
e
Data platforms fortranslational focus of social science, arts and humanities
n
siv
E
e co
P
G E N E R I C   S
Figure	17.	The	UK’s	current	national	research	and	innovation	e-infrastructure	ecosystem.
m
puting
IRIS
CASE STUDY:  The Hartree Centre: transforming UK industry through HPC, ‘big data’  and cognitive technologies (AI) 
The	Hartree	Centre	is	the	only	supercomputing	centre	in	the	UK	with	industrial	engagement	as	its	primary	role.	It	was	established	to	allow	UK	businesses,	ranging	from	large	corporate	organisations	to	startups	and	small	businesses,	to	benefit	from	the	specialist	expertise	and	access	to	supercomputers	and	other	emerging	technologies	that	would	normally	only	be	available	to	academic	researchers93.
Developed	following	significant	funding	from	UK	government,	and	with	strategic	partnerships	with	major	industry	leaders,	the	Hartree	Centre	brings	together	some	of	the	most	advanced	systems,	technologies	and	experts	in	these	fields.	The	sectors	of	the	economy	where	Hartree	is	generating	impact	include:	consumer	goods	(32%),	energy	(6%),	manufacturing	(14%),	transport	(6%),	chemicals	(7%),	ICT	(14%)	and	other	sectors	(21%).	In	its	first	four	years	of	operation,	the	Hartree	Centre	has:
  Undertaken	100	projects	with	
commercial companies
  Carried	out	a	further	sixty-seven	projects	with	other	organisations	such	as	the	Met	Office
  Delivered	£27.5	million	net	commercial	
benefit	to	its	users
  Achieved	an	additional	£7.1	million	net	impact	from	its	operational	expenditure
ertneCeetraH/CFTS
  Delivered	130	training	courses,	totalling	
3,760	training	days
116
[Page #120]
  To	progress	towards	a	more	integrated	
8.2 Future directionFor	the	UK	to	remain	at	the	forefront	of	research	and	innovation	will	require	a	long-term	and	strategic	programme	of	investment	in	e-infrastructure.	This	will	need	to	address	the	requirements	of	the	whole	UK	research	and	innovation	community	and	should	enable	and	support	cross-disciplinary	research.	The	level	of	ambition	needs	to	reflect	the	transformative	and	disruptive	nature	of	applications	of	computational	techniques	across	the	research	and innovation sectors.   
e-infrastructure	ecosystem	by	developing	the	tools	and	techniques	to	support	it	(access	and	security,	data	storage	and	access)	and	by	finding	opportunities	for	interoperability,	co-location	and	aggregation	of	resources
  To	nurture	a	cadre	of	highly	skilled	data	
and	computationally	literate	professionals	whose	influence	extends	beyond	academia	–	this	is	an	essential	for	maintaining	the	UK’s	scientific	leadership	and	to	contribute	to	the	skills	base	required	to	deliver	the	government’s	Industrial	Strategy
Our	objectives	are:
  To	support	the	adoption	of	new	technology	
across	all	sectors,	recognising	that	the	leading	edge	of	informatics	technology	is	advancing rapidly
  To	host	a	world-class	national	exascale	
supercomputing	facility	by	the	middle	of	the	next decade
  To	increase	the	ease	of	access	to	
  To	accelerate	the	development	of	the	UK’s	
e-infrastructure	resources	for	users	from	across	the	different	research	sectors	and	 to drive innovation
computational	and	data-intensive	research	by	providing increased capacity and capability across	the	e-infrastructure	ecosystem
UK Research and Innovation Review of Artificial IntelligenceAI	and	data	is	one	of	the	Industrial	Strategy	Grand	Challenges.	The	Dame	Wendy	Hall	report	Growing	the	Artificial	Intelligence	Industry94	estimates	exploitation	of	AI	technologies	and	data	assets	will	add	£630	billion	to	the	UK	economy	by	2035.	UK	Research	and	Innovation	is	currently	undertaking	a	review	of	AI	research	and	innovation.	This	review	will	provide	a	strategic	analysis	of	the	support	for	AI	research	and	innovation	and	recommend	future	support	strategies	that	will	enable	AI	to	reach	its	full	potential	in	the	UK.	It	will	draw	on	the	analysis	from	this	programme	to	consider	all	facets	of	support	required	and	look	more	broadly	to	cover	the	critical	research	and	innovation	challenges	and	skills	needs	that	if,	addressed,	will	enable	the	UK	to	maintain	its	world-leading	position.	
The	objectives	of	the	review	are	to:
  Map	UK	Research	and	Innovation’s	current	support	for	AI-related	research	and	innovation
  Engage	key	stakeholders	in	exploring	the	UK’s	ambitions	and	desired	outcomes	for	AI-related	
research	and	innovation,	and	consider	the	role	of	public	investment	in	delivering	these
  Set	the	UK’s	current	position	and	future	potential	in	an	international	context
  Set	out	a	strategy	for	appropriately	supporting	AI	research	and	innovation	in	the	UK
An	advisory	group	chaired	by	Professor	Tom	Rodden	has	been	established	and	the	review	will	report	in	autumn	2019.
117
[Page #121]
ecosystem	that	provides	capability	at	local,	regional	and	national	levels.	It	is	also	necessary	for	the	optimal	provision	of	sufficient	capacity	to meet emerging demand and to deliver services	in	an	integrated	way.	For	example,	developing	a	national	exascale	facility	by	the	middle	of	the	next	decade	will	require	a	number	of	intermediate	steps	in	terms	of	hardware	provision.
8.3 Future requirements  and opportunitiesConsultation	over	the	course	of	the	programme	suggests	the	need	for	an	ambitious	plan	for	the	development	of	the	UK’s	e-infrastructure,	in	recognition	of	the	certain growth in future demand	and	the	importance	of	e-infrastructure	in	increasing	the	value	and	efficiency	of	other	research	and	innovation	infrastructure.	Alongside	this	growth	in	demand,	the	diversity	of	users	from	academia	and	industry	is	also	increasing	which	means	the	requirement	for	flexibility, diversity and heterogeneity	in	the	system is critical. 
The	effective	operation	of	any	e-infrastructure	ecosystem	is	also	dependent	on	the	availability	of	the	right	skills	and	talent	in	universities,	research	institutes	and	business	(Chapter	11).	In	this	sector,	support	for	research software engineers and research data professionals is particularly critical. 
Investment	in	the	UK’s	e-infrastructure	ecosystem	needs	to	be	strategic,	coherent	and	long	term.	Given	that	major	refreshes	in	computational	infrastructure	are	needed	on	a	regular	cycle	of	three	to	five	years,	effective	planning will require a sustained multi-year investment	in	the	overall	ecosystem.	This	would	support	a	more	strategic	approach	across	the	ecosystem	as	a	whole,	enhancing	our	ability	to	rapidly	adopt	evolving	technologies	and	to	respond	to	changing	demands.	Longer-term	planning,	combined	with	technology	horizon	scanning,	will	ensure	the	UK	is	well	placed	to	take	advantage	of	new	technologies.	
In	producing	this	report	there	has	been	a	great	deal	of	progress	in	mapping	the	future	e-infrastructure	requirements	of	the	UK’s	research	and	innovation	communities.	The	table	below	summarises	the	main	themes	for	the	future	of	the	UK’s	e-infrastructure,	which	will	form	the	basis	for	the	development	of	a	detailed	longer-term	strategy.	As	described	in	Chapter	2,	these	are	at	different	stages	of	development.	Some	areas	need	further	work	to	better	understand	the	requirement,	strategic	importance,	support	within	the	community	and	ability	to	be	delivered,	whilst	others	are	more	developed and could be implemented sooner.
Longer-term	planning	is	essential	in	the	development	of	a	coherent	e-infrastructure	
Supercomputing
1
Research datainfrastructure
Software and skills
6
2
omp
Computationalputationaland dand E-infrastructure E-infrastrusectortothemestheme
Authentication, Authorisation and Accounting Infrastructure
5
3
Cloud computing
4
Network andcyber security
Figure	18.	Computational	and	e-infrastructure	themes	overview.
118
[Page #122]
Computational and e-infrastructure theme summary
  Top	supercomputing	tiers,	aiming	towards	exascale	by	2025
Supercomputing (HPC)
  HTC	for	facilities/research	centres
  Research	into	emerging	quantum	computing	capabilities
  Data	centres	to	deal	with	ever-increasing	capacity	requirements
Research	data	infrastructure:	data storage and High-Throughput	Computing	(HTC)
  Middleware	and	application	programming	Interfaces	to	enable	data	
access and analysis
  Computational	HTC	resources	to	analyse	large	data	sets	
  Data	management	and	curation	services	and	the	development	of	metadata	infrastructure	to	support	integration	and	interoperability
Research	data	infrastructure:	research	data	management
  Management,	coordination	and	oversight	of	cloud	computing	for	the	
Cloud	computing
research	community
  Support	for	the	transition	of	UK	Research	and	Innovation	workloads	to	hybrid	ecosystems	by	developing	models	and	technical	solutions	for	more	cost-effective	use	of	cloud	computing
  Consideration	of	the	national	network	(Janet),	its	interconnections	to	other	national	and	international	networks	and	the	connection	to	campuses	of	universities	and	laboratories
Network	and	cybersecurity
  Development	of	access	management	tools	to	enable	flexible	
Authentication,	Authorisation	and Accounting Infrastructure	(AAAI)
interoperability	of	e-infrastructures	and	data	resources
  Support	for	software	engineering,	maintenance	and	product	
Software	and	skills
development	using	existing	mechanisms	including	targeted	calls	
  New	software	and	algorithms	to	address	emerging	societal	challenges,	new	technologies	such	as	exascale,	AI	and	machine	learning,	and	the	data	challenges	such	as	metadata	and	interoperability
  Career	development	of	research	software	engineers	and	research	 
data	professionals
119
[Page #123]
computing	resources;	it	is	almost	a	factor	of	two	behind	Italy,	more	than	a	factor	of	two	behind	Poland	and	more	than	a	factor	of	three	behind	both	Germany	and	France.	
Theme 1: Supercomputing High-Performance	Computers	(HPC),	often	referred	to	as	supercomputers,	are	computational	facilities	used	to	support	research	requiring	calculations	or	simulations	that	are	so	complex	that	they	cannot	be	performed	elsewhere.	HPC	applications	range	from	‘digital	twinning’	of	complex	engineering	components,	to	detailed	simulations	of	turbulent	fluid	flow,	to	the	theoretical	calculations	of	lattice	quantum	chromodynamics	that	underpin	precise	measurements	at	the	LHC.	Supercomputers	are	also	being	used	for	large-scale	AI	and	machine	learning	challenges	with	research	and	innovation	applications.	
There	is	emerging	consensus	that	the	UK	should	host	a	national	exascale	Tier-0	facility	by	the	middle	of	the	next	decade,	cementing	our	position	at	the	forefront	of	high-end	computing.	This	would	put	the	UK	on	a	path	to	world-class	HPC	capability	for	the	next	ten	years:
  Medium-term: a	UK	national	exascale	facility
  Short- to medium-term: either	a	national	pre-exascale system or access to international facilities	to	enable	UK	researchers	to	develop	the	skills	necessary	to	utilise	the	potential	of	exascale	computational	architectures
The	current	UK	HPC	ecosystem	can	be	categorised	into	four	tiers95	(Figure	19).	Tier-1	resources	provide	the	highest-capability	national	research	HPC	machines,	such	as	ARCHER	and	DiRAC.	Tier-2	provides	institutional	training	and	entry-level	HPC	such	as	Peta-5	and	MONSooN.	Tier-3	machines	mainly	provide	local	university	resources.	UK	researchers	can	also	access	leadership-class	capability	Tier-0	resources	through	the	Partnership	for	Advanced	Computing	in	Europe	(PRACE)96. 
  Short-term:	refresh	of	existing	facilities/
capabilities,	targeting	increased	coherence	of	approaches	and	hardware	–	this	could	include	the	provision	of	a	new	system	optimised	for	AI/deep-learning	applications
Achieving	this	goal	and	maximising	the	benefits	to	UK	research	and	innovation	will	require	sustained	strategic	investment	across	the	tiers,	supporting	a	well-coordinated	supercomputing	service	including	a	Tier	0	scale	system	at	the	apex.	Looking	beyond	the	exascale,	there	is	a	need	for	research	into	the	concept	of	future	computational	architectures	combining	traditional	Central	Processing	Units,	Graphics	Processing	Units	and	emerging	quantum computing capabilities.	This	would	build	on	the	tiered supercomputing service described above.
The	UK’s	computing	requirements	are	expanding,	but	the	capacity	available	is	already	severely	constrained.	The	UK	is	trailing	its	European	neighbours	in	terms	of	available	
Data Intensive
Most Detailed Simulation
CustomisedSimulationHardware
T1: Discipline Programme Specific NationalFacilities
T0: Leadership (World) Class National Facilities 
Largest ScaleData Science
CustomisedUsageHardware
T2: Instrument / Facility Based
T3: Local Facilities (e.g: Groups, Departments, HEIs)
SKA
IRIS & LHC Tier 1
AI & ML Specialised
T2: Entry Level &ExploratoryPlatforms 
NationalInstituteServices
Next generation
Figure	19.	The	components	of	a	balanced	supercomputing	ecosystem	Image	credit:	Lawrence	&	Jenner.
120
[Page #124]
Theme 1: Supercomputing
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Leadership-class	(Tier-0)	national	supercomputing facilities
The	aim	would	be	to	meet	the	goal	of	the	UK	hosting	an	exascale	system	by	2025/26,	in	support	of	Grand	Challenges	which	push	the	frontiers	of	science	and	innovation.	A	project	is	currently	under	way	to	scope	the	options	including	the	potential	to	work	with	international	partners.
Workflow-specific	(Tier-1)	national	supercomputing facilities	with	distinct capabilities in	support	of	particular types of	modelling	or particular communities
This	would	involve	supporting	Grand	Challenges	that	require	specialist	hardware	tailored	to	the	scientific	requirements.	Examples	include:
  DiRAC	  ARCHER	(ARCHER2	in	procurement)  The	Met	Office	  The	Hartree	Centre  JASMIN	  UKAEA	(planning	under	way)  EMBL-EBI	(phase	1	under	way,	planning	for	phase	2	in	preparation)
National	AI	service
A	national	service	for	machine	learning	applications	would	work	across	 UK	Research	and	Innovation’s	remit	and	include	hardware,	software	 and	service	support.	This	has	the	potential	to	offer	‘machine	learning	as	 a	service’.
Tier-2
Expansion	of	Tier-2	facilities:	entry-level	and	exploratory	platforms	would	allow	users	to	carry	out	larger	computations	relatively	quickly	and	find	out	whether	larger/longer	projects	on	other	platforms	may	be	practical.	Investment	here	would	also	allow	exploration	of	new	computing	 paradigms	and	provide	experimental	test	beds	for	both	hardware	and	software	development.
Hosting	infrastructure
Development	of	data	centres	and	computer	centres	to	host	e-infrastructure	facilities	would	need	to	be	in	place	to	avoid	delays	in	installing	and	using	supercomputer	facilities.
Beyond	exascale	–	quantum computing
There	is	an	opportunity	for	additional	research	into	the	potential	of	future	computational	architectures	that	incorporate	quantum	computing	accelerators.	The	current	need	is	for	additional	research	in	the	field	but	may	lead	to	infrastructure	investments	in	quantum	computing	within	a	 few	years.	
121
[Page #125]
are	expected	to	drive	international	healthcare	data	volumes	to	17.1	exabytes	by	2020.	By	2030,	estimates	of	global	patient	data	of	800	exabytes	seem	plausible,	with	the	UK	component	estimated	to	be	about	7%	(60	exabytes).
Theme 2: Research data infrastructure The	diversity	of	data	sources	means	that	infrastructure	requirements	are	often	domain-specific	and	closely	linked	to	the	data	collection	and production process. Expert engagement over	the	course	of	this	programme	suggests	an	extremely	high	growth	rate	in	data	availability	across	all	sectors.	This	is	evident	in	each	of	the	previous	chapters,	all	of	which	contain	options	for	additional	data	generation	and	collection	infrastructures.
This	projected	rapid	increase	in	data	volume	presents	challenges	in	terms	of	both	data	storage	provision	and	the	required	rapid	growth	in	computational	resources	for	analysis.	These	HTC	resources	will	need	to	be	scaled	to	meet	the	challenges	presented	by	large-scale	facilities	(such	as	the	High-Luminosity	LHC,	the	SKA	and	Diamond)	and	the	needs	of	the	biomedical	and	social	sciences.	At	this	stage,	it	is	not	possible	to	present	a	detailed	assessment	of	likely	future	needs	but	it	is	clear	that	sustained	investment	is	required	to	exploit	existing	and	future	infrastructures.	A more detailed roadmap for the development of research and innovation data infrastructure over the longer term is a priority. 
Although	hard	to	quantify,	the	estimates	of	potential	data	storage	requirements	comfortably	exceed	the	exabyte	scale	(where	an	exabyte	is	1018	bytes).	For	example,	the	GAIA	all-sky	survey	database	is	set	to	become	one	of	the	first	petabyte-scale	(1015	bytes)	databases	with	data	from	over	2	billion	stars	in	our	galaxy.	In	the	healthcare	sector,	increased	precision	imaging	and	digitisation	of	healthcare	records	
CASE STUDY:  ELIXIR a distributed infrastructure for life science information
ELIXIR	brings	together	life	science	data	resources	from	twenty-two	members	located	in	twenty-one	countries	across	Europe	and	EMBL,	to	manage	and	safeguard	data	through	databases,	software	tools,	cloud	storage	and	computing	facilities	and	training	opportunities.	ELIXIR	enables	the	life	sciences	to	derive	maximum	knowledge	and	understanding	from	biological,	medical	and	environmental	‘Big	data’.
ELIXIR	brings	experts	together	to	tackle	challenges	with	far-reaching	impacts,	e.g.	resource	interoperability,	secure	access	to	human	data,	and	scalable	genomics.	For	example,	the	Human	Protein	Atlas	is	used	1.2	million	times	per	year	by	scientists	from	198	countries.	ELIXIR	is	organised	as	national	nodes	and	hub	(hosted	by	EMBL-EBI	within	the	Wellcome	Genome	Campus,	which	is	also	represented	as	a	node).	The	UK	node	(of	fifteen	organisations)	unites	UK	experts	and	resources	in	bioinformatics	and	computational	biology	at	a	national	level.
yabaxPmorfezeeks
i
122
[Page #126]
Theme 2: Research data infrastructure
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Data storage and HTC:	short-term
Provision	of	data	storage	and	HTC	resources	is	needed	to	exploit	existing	infrastructures	and	those	coming	online	in	the	near	future.	
Longer-term	planning
Develop	a	roadmap	for	UK	research	and	innovation	data	infrastructure	(storage	and	computational	resources)	taking	into	account	the	projected	needs	of	all	sectors.	This	should	consider:	
  Access and analysis infrastructure: requirements	for	physical	storage,	
HTC	for	analysis	and	the	software	tools	(‘middleware’)	to	enable	access	and analysis
  Research data management or ‘stewardship’ infrastructure, including the	software	tools	for	curation	and	management,	and	skills	required
  Opportunities for sharing and co-location
Many	HEIs	and	research	and	innovation	organisations	have	their	own	dedicated	data	infrastructures	that	provide	data	storage	and	access.	Mechanisms	to	support	and	fund	data	infrastructures	also	exist	across	UK	Research	and	Innovation.	These	include	support	for	UK	Research	and	Innovation	Council-focused	repositories	and	designated	funding	schemes	that	can	be	used	to	support	innovative	software	and	analytics,	for	example	the	BBSRC	Bioinformatics	and	Biological	Resources	Fund.	There	are	strong	opportunities	for	sharing	best	practice	in	data	management,	processing,	curation,	analysis	and	knowledge	generation;	 the	implementation	of	FAIR	(Findable,	Accessible,	Interoperable,	Reusable)	principles;	and	identifying	opportunities	for	sharing	or	co-
location.	This	requires	strategic	coordination	 in order to ensure appropriate integration  and	federation.
Theme 3: Cloud computing Cloud	computing	has	brought	about	a	fundamental	shift	across	many	sectors	in	the	way	e-infrastructure	is	provisioned	and	accessed.	Researchers	and	innovators	need	to	be	able	to	access	the	most	appropriate	computing	solutions.	Both	cloud	computing	and	more	traditional	approaches	are	likely	to	be	needed	to	address	the	data	challenges	highlighted	in	Theme	2	above.	The	balance	between	the	different	approaches	needs	to	be	informed	by	practical	and	commercial	considerations.
Theme 3: Cloud computing
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Cloud	computing	strategy
Development	of	a	clear	cloud	computing	strategy	is	critical	to	support	best	practice	use	of	cloud	across	the	research	and	innovation	community	and	to	ensure	we	make	the	most	of	the	opportunity	that	cloud	provides.
123
[Page #127]
These	networks	need	to	remain	competitive	and	responsive	to	the	changing	nature	and	levels	of	user	demand.	As	well	as	directly	enabling	data	access	and	analysis	for	the	wider	research	community,	they	indirectly	support	collaboration	and	sharing.	They	also	need	to	be	able	to	detect,	protect	and	mitigate	the	rising	level	of	cyber	threats	to	infrastructure,	confidentiality	and	integrity	of	research	data.	
Theme 4: Network and  cybersecurity infrastructureA seamless and reliable service requires a	series	of	interconnected	networks	involving	a	complex	ecosystem	of	technical	standards and operating agreements and underpinned by telecommunications infrastructure	of	appropriate	capability,	capacity	and	geographical	reach.	This	requires	consideration	of	the	national	network	(Janet),	its	interconnections	to	other	national	and	international	networks,	and	the	connection	to	campuses	of	universities	and	laboratories.
Theme 4: Network and cybersecurity infrastructure
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Janet	and	campus	networks
A	multi-year	programme	of	investment	in	the	network	and	cybersecurity	would	build	further	capability	in	campus	networks	and	nationally.		
This	could	be	achieved	through	a	series	of	capacity	upgrades	until	2028	when	the	current	contract	ends	and	would	provide	the	transmission	infrastructure	to	move	data	at	scale,	reliably	and	with	international	reach.
and	innovators	to	access	the	resources	they	need	and	are	permitted	to	use	more	easily.	It	includes	services	to	facilitate	secure	access	to	data	that	can	only	be	made	available	through	a	secure	environment.	Benefits	of	a	national	AAAI	include	increased	sharing	and	reuse	of	data	between	different	research	disciplines,	increased	access	to	international	resources,	improved	researcher	experience,	lower	integration	and	operational	cost	and	increased	security	of	data	and resource.
Theme 5: Authentication, Authorisation and Accounting Infrastructure (AAAI) AAAI	is	a	key	enabler	of	federating	e-infrastructures	in	a	flexible	and	responsive	way.	It	is	a	framework	for	intelligently	facilitating	reliable,	seamless	and	transparent	access	to	potentially	high-volume,	geographically	distributed	and	complex	data	with	many	owners	for	researchers	who	wish	to	share	and	work collaboratively and in a secure manner. A common	AAAI	framework	will	allow	researchers	
Theme 5: Authentication, Authorisation and Accounting Infrastructure (AAAI)
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
AAAI
The	development	of	a	national	AAAI	would	facilitate	reliable,	seamless	and	transparent	access	to	potentially	high-volume,	geographically	distributed	and	complex	data	with	many	owners	for	distributed	and	varied	researchers	who	wish	to	work	collaboratively	and	in	a	secure	manner.	There	are	existing	islands	of	AAAI	and	work	is	needed	to	create	and	implement	a	common	framework.
124
[Page #128]
CASE STUDY:  Improving neurosurgery through HPC and novel software
University	College	London	researchers	are	collaborating	with	Allinea	Software	to	develop	software	that	models	blood	flow	within	the	cranium,	the	part	of	the	skull	that	encloses	the	brain,	using	data	generated	by	an	MRI	scan.
This	improves	our	understanding	of	blood	pressure	near	points	of	weakness	such	as	aneurysms,	which	in	turn	improves	treatment	of	patients.	The	software	has	undergone	extensive	development	using	the	national	HPC	service,	ARCHER,	to	enable	the	study	of	the	Circle	of	Willis	(a	network	of	blood	vessels	in	the	brain)	for	very	first	time.
software	and	69%	report	that	it	is	fundamental	to	their	research	with	software	development	a	research	activity	in	its	own	right.	The	near-ubiquity	of	software	means	that	it	is	not	possible	to	disentangle	the	quality	of	the	software	from	the	quality	of	the	research.	Unreliable	and	untested	software	leads	to	unreliable	results	that	cannot	be	trusted.	
Theme 6: Software and skillsSoftware	lies	at	the	heart	of	many	research	and	innovation	activities.	It	is	needed	to	control	the	instrumentation	to	record	data.	It	is	used	for	the	complex modelling required to understand cell function,	fusion	reactions	and	the	climate.	It	is	the	enabling	technology	behind	major	advances	such	as	decoding	the	human	genome	and	the	discovery	of	the	Higgs	boson	and	it	lies	at	the	heart	of	strategically	important	technologies	such	as	AI.	Software	can	be	a	few	lines	of	code	written	by	a	single	researcher	or	a	major	framework	developed	over	decades	by	dedicated	teams	of	researchers	and	software	engineers.	In	academia,	92%	of	UK	researchers	use	research	
The	development	of	a	clear	strategy	for	software	with	support	for	high-quality	software	development and strong policies to support best practice	is	a	critical	part	of	the	future	landscape.	Such	a	strategy	would	provide	an	important	strategic	framework	for	the	options	set	out	below.
Theme 6: Software and skills
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Software	to	support	future	research	and	societal	challenges
Targeted	funding	could	support:
  Software	to	accelerate	progress	on	key	research	challenges
  Forward-looking	activities	exploring	the	software	implications	and	
opportunities	of	step-changes	in	computing	hardware
  Software	infrastructure	that	enables	interoperability	between	data	
collections	and	improves	metadata	enrichment	and	effective	use	of	data
Software	maintenance
A	programme	supporting	maintenance	and	development	of	existing	software	would	enable	the	full	value	to	be	extracted	from	software	throughout	its	lifetime.	This	could	be	based	on	existing	funding	mechanisms.
Software	communities	of	practice
This	could	involve	support	for	mechanisms	such	as	collaborative	computational	projects,	consortia	and	the	Computational	Science	Centre	for	Research	Communities.
125
[Page #129]
The	development	of	software	and	the	support	of	the	UK’s	e-infrastructure	relies	heavily	on	skilled	researchers.	If	the	UK	is	to	meet	the	ambition	of	remaining	at	the	forefront	of	computational	and	data-intensive	science,	the	career	development	of	research	software	engineers	and	research	data	professionals	is	critical.	These	professionals	also	have	important	roles	in	teaching	and	training	at	both	undergraduate	and	graduate	level	and	may	be	based	in	universities,	research	institutes	or	businesses.	
across	both	industry	and	academia,	so	it	is	critical	that	the	UK	provides	the	environment	to	nurture	and	retain	these	highly	skilled	individuals. 
Future	needs	could	be	addressed	through	existing	mechanisms	or	through	the	creation	of	a	national	network	of	facilities	for	research	software	engineering,	which	could	help	broker	access	to	these	skills	across	the	UK.	Investment	in	business	engagement	and	development	of	skills	would	also	enable	enhanced	collaboration	with	industry.	The	skills	required,	which	are	summarised	in	the	table	below,	are	wider	than	just	those	of	research	software	engineers	and	research	data	professionals.
Until	recently,	the	career	paths	for	software	engineers	and	research	data	professionals	within	academia	had	not	been	well	defined.	These	skill	sets	are	already	in	high	demand	
Example roles and functions needed for an effective operational UK  e-infrastructure system
Expertise
Function
Research	software	engineering
Develop	software	applications	for	deployment.
Research	operations	engineering
Build,	test,	configure	and	release/deploy	services.	Operational	interface	between	the	scientist/researcher	and	the	deployed	environment.
Network	engineering
Manage	on-premise	network	infrastructure	and	cloud	connectivity.
Data engineering and wrangling
Design,	build	and	manage	the	information	infrastructure.	Transform	and	map	data	from	one	‘raw’	format	into	another.
Data analysis and data mining
Discover	patterns	in	large	data	sets	with	the	goal	of	discovering	useful	information,	informing	conclusions	and	supporting	 decision-making.
Data	curation,	stewardship	and management
Acquisition	and	curation	of	information	from	one	or	more	sources	and	the	use	of	tools	to	curate	data	for	different	analytical	tasks.
Information	security	and	governance
Manage	information	at	an	organisation,	balancing	the	use	and	security	of	information.	Legal	compliance,	operational	transparency.
126
[Page #130]
Chapter 9: Large-scale, multi-sector facilities
127
ILL / Peter Ginter
[Page #131]
Addressing the challenges faced by UK businesses and policy-makers requires research and innovation within and across traditional disciplines and boundaries. Infrastructure can play a unique role in bringing together different combinations of expertise to address complex problems and foster the sharing of knowhow. This chapter focuses  on large-scale, multi-sector facilities that are established with the intention to serve  a wide multitude of sectors.
Our	analysis	of	the	current	UK	landscape	shows	how	92% of infrastructures already work across more than one sector and many provide underpinning capability to support a diverse array	of	projects	and	programmes.	Working	across	disciplines	and	sectors	is	both	important	and	challenging.	Stakeholders	have	commented	throughout	this	programme	on	both	the	benefits	and	the	barriers	to	inter-	and	multidisciplinary	working.	Shared	goals	and	use	of	common	facilities	can	lead	to	new	collaborations	and	demonstrate	the	benefits	of	diverse	expertise.	Fostering a collaborative culture is critical but often	requires	proactive	support	to	develop	the	necessary	behaviours,	structures	and	practices.
This	chapter	focuses	on	the	large-scale,	multi-sector	facilities	that	are	established	with	the	intention	of	serving	a	wide	multitude	of	sectors.	The	UK	has	a	strong	track	record	in	establishing	and	operating	such	facilities	which	often	operate	for	many	decades,	take	many	years	of	planning	and	are	technically	complex,	necessitating	delivery	through	national-	and	international-scale	collaborations.	They	are	designed	to	support	users	from	across	academia	and	business	sectors,	with	skilled	technical	staff	working	closely	with	visiting	researchers	as	well	as	undertaking	in-house	research	and	innovation.	Cross-fertilisation	of	ideas	is	stimulated	at	such	facilities	where	users	bring	a	variety	of	research	questions	and	innovation	challenges.
Investing in research to develop new methods and technologies	is	a	critical	component	of	the	fundamental	discovery	work	UK	Research	and	Innovation	supports	and	there	are	opportunities to foster innovation by using the expertise developed in one discipline in new contexts.	Infrastructures	can	act	as	a	test	bed	for	prototyping	and	developing	the	next-	generation	of	instrumentation	by	working	with	potential	suppliers,	leading	to	new	business	opportunities.	They	can	also	foster	innovation	in	methodologies	to	inform	the	next-generation	of	infrastructure	investments.	This	is	facilitated	by	the	ability	of	the	expert	staff	at	infrastructures	to	work	with	multiple	types	of	user	from	academia	and business.
These	facilities	are	dedicated	to	characterising	and	imaging	the	molecular	and	atomic	structures	of	inorganic	and	biological	materials	using	a	range	of	technologies	such	as	synchrotrons,	conventional	and	Free	Electron	Lasers	(FELs),	X-rays,	neutron	reactors	or	spallation	sources.	This	detailed	characterisation	has	proved	important	in	the	development	of	new	pharmaceutical	products,	provided	chemical	analysis	to	improve	fuel	delivery	efficiency	in	engines	and	revealed	the	structures	of	molecules	that	in	turn	have	helped	generate	new	treatments	for	cancers8.
128
[Page #132]
CASE STUDY:  Boulby Underground Laboratory 
The	STFC	Boulby	Underground	Laboratory	is	the	only	deep	underground	science	facility	in	the	UK.	Located	on	the	edge	of	the	North	Yorkshire	Moors,	the	laboratory	is	housed	within	the	tunnels	of	a	working	polyhalite	and	rock-salt	mine.	1,100m	of	rock	overhead	shields	the	laboratory	from	the	natural	cosmic	rays	which	bombard	the	Earth’s	surface,	and	the	surrounding	rock	salt	is	low	in	natural	background	radioactivity.	This	makes	Boulby	the	ideal	location	for	low-background	particle	physics	experiments	as	well	as	other	projects	requiring	access	to	the	scientifically	interesting	deep	underground	environment.	Studies	under	way	at	Boulby	range	from	neutrino	studies	and	the	search	for	the	dark	matter	in	the	Universe	to	studies	of	geology,	geophysics	and	biology	in	extreme	environments	and	technology	development	for	mining	and	planetary	exploration.	
.
CFTS
,
yrotarobaLdnuorgrednUybuoBforotceriD
l
,
gn
il
aPnaeS
cross-fertilisation	of	ideas	that	can	lead	to	new	products,	services	and	business	opportunities	(Chapter	10).	These	facilities	support	research	and innovation across sectors as indicated in	the	following	table.	The	connection	to	the	wider	research	and	innovation	base,	including	the	life	sciences,	is	enhanced	by	the	Research	Complex	at	Harwell	(RCaH)	and	the	Rosalind	Franklin	Institute,	which	is	under	construction.	For	example,	RCaH	houses	CLF	lasers,	imaging	equipment	and	equipment	for	preparing	samples	that	have	short	lifetimes	or	cannot	travel	 great distances. 
9.1 Overview of current capabilityThe	UK	is	a	partner	in	many	international	facilities	including	the	Institut	Max	von	Laue	–	Paul	Langevin	(ILL),	the	European	Spallation	Source	(ESS),	the	European	X-ray	Free-Electron	Laser	Facility	(European	XFEL)	and	the	European	Synchrotron	Radiation	Facility	(ESRF).	The	UK’s	national	large-scale	multidisciplinary	facilities	are	based	at	the	Rutherford	Appleton	Laboratory	(RAL)	on	the	Harwell	Campus,	including	Diamond,	the	Central	Laser	Facility	(CLF)	and	the	ISIS	Neutron	and	Muon	Source	(ISIS).	This	co-location	at	the	Harwell	Campus	allows	
129
[Page #133]
Examples of the cross-sectoral reach of the UK’s large-scale, multi-sector facilities:
Physical sciences and engineering
Social sciences, arts and humanities
Environment 
Energy
Facility 
Biological sciences, health and food 
Understanding	astrophysical	objects and processes
Analysis	of	ancient	human	remains
Understanding	cloud	chemistry
Laser-driven	fusion
CLF
Imaging	biological	samples
Dark matter experiments
Geology/	geophysics	studies
Muon	tomography	for	CCS	applications
Boulby	Underground	Laboratory
Impact	of	low-radiation	environments on organisms
Diamond/ESRF
Understanding	and	tackling	the	origins	of	disease	and ageing
Accelerating	the	discovery	of	new	materials and manufacturing	processes
Study and preservation	of	old-master paintings and	archaeological	finds
Studies into the	impact	of	air pollution on climate	change	
Sustainable solutions	for	pollution	from	plastics	and	for	car	exhaust	design
European XFEL
Analysing	the	structure	of	biomolecules
Research	into	better	catalysts	for	industry
Studying natural photosynthesis	processes
Solar	cell	and	fuel	cell	energy	research
ESS/ILL/ISIS	Neutron	and	Muon	Source		
Developing improved antiviral drugs
Analysis	of	archaeological	artefacts
Studies into air and water pollution
Investigating	materials and fabrication	processes	for	space	and aerospace applications
Materials	/	technologies	for	energy generation and	storage	(e.g.	batteries,	fuel	cells)
Experiments	run	at	these	infrastructures	typically	produce	huge	volumes	of	data	and	the	storage	of,	processing	of	and	access	to	such	data	are	a	vital	part	of	the	infrastructure	landscape.	Many	of	the	large	facilities	require	dedicated	and	specialised	e-infrastructure	to	support	their	data	storage	and	analysis. 
The	increasing	complexity	of	these	infrastructures,	the	large	data	outputs,	the	challenging	and	extreme	environments	and	the	multidisciplinary	nature	of	the	problems	they	address	make	continuous technical advancement	particularly	important.	This	improves	the	capability	of	the	facility;	for	example,	automation	of	sample	preparation	areas	significantly	improves	the	efficiency	of	processing,	allowing	greater	throughput	and	improved access.
9.2 Future directionThe	nature	of	these	large-scale	facilities	means	the	UK	operates	as	part	of	a	global	network	and	any	coherent	plan	for	UK	facilities	must	also	take	account	of	international	developments.	Supporting the next-generation of large-scale, multidisciplinary infrastructures such	as	light	sources,	electron	tomography,	FELs,	neutron	sources and intense laser sources is an important element	of	the	UK	research	and	innovation	landscape	and	there	is	the	potential	for	the	UK	to	host	a	new	international	facility.	Upgrades to existing multidisciplinary facilities,	such	as	the	European	Synchrotron	Radiation	Facility-Extremely	Brilliant	Source,	can	also	lead	to	step-changes	in	capability	and	are	important	to	ensure	our	facilities	can	collectively	continue	to	support	 a	broad	spectrum	of	evolving	research	needs.	
Working in partnership with users: it is critical to	ensure	the	right	infrastructures	are	being	utilised	for	the	right	research.	Infrastructure	staff	working	alongside	and	in	partnership	with	users	rather	than	as	a	‘service	provider’	can	ensure	the	best	use	of	their	capability	and	ensure	research	quality.	Regular	competitive	reviews	of	the	quality	of	the	research,	drawing	on	international	expertise,	are	an	essential	part	of	this	process.	
Facilitating the links between large, centralised facilities and local capability could result in greater	productivity	and	new	areas	of	scientific	discovery	(Chapter	10).	In	some	areas,	the	ability	
130
[Page #134]
CASE STUDY:  Lowering the barriers to neutron application
The	ISIS-Data	Analysis	as	a	Service	(IDAaaS)	computer	architecture	enables	users	of	the	ISIS	Neutron	and	Muon	facility	to	quickly	and	simply analyse large data sets produced by experiments.	The	IDAaaS	technology	provides	powerful	computing	resources,	software	tools	and	data	storage	via	an	easy-to-use	interface97.
technologies	and	enhance	quantum	computing	developments97.	IDAaaS	is	critical	to	this	kind	 of	research,	allowing	the	researchers	direct	access	to	their	data	and	the	ability	to	analyse	it	without	the	need	to	invest	in	their	own	specialised	technology,	software	and	large	personal storage space. 
Data	analysis	has	historically	been	a	major	barrier	to	maximising	outputs	from	large	research	facilities,	with	users	unable	to	store	or	process	their	data	effectively.	The	running	costs	of	each	ISIS	instrument	are	as	much	as	£11,000	per	day	so	it	is	important	that	users	can	make	the	best	use	of	their	time	on	the	instruments.	
For	example,	researchers	have	used	the	ISIS	Neutron	and	Muon	Source	to	characterise	magnetic	interactions	in	single-molecule	magnets	as	part	of	their	work	to	chemically	design	new	molecules.	Being	able	to	design	molecules	with	desired	magnetic	properties	could	enable	future	data	storage	
.)SSI(
I
i
duGanaitaT
i
to	do	precursor	studies,	analyses	and	sample	preparation	prior	to	accessing	the	large	facilities	would	be	beneficial.	A	good	example	of	how	a	national	research	facility	can	help	to	bridge	the	gap	to	the	large	facilities	is	the	work	of	the	UK	National	Crystallography	Service	alongside	Diamond’s	small-molecule	single-crystal	diffraction	beamline98,99.	This	allows	the	user	to	have	access	to	the	right	tool	for	the	right	sample	at	the	right	time,	making	more	productive	use	of	staff	and	facility	time.	
RCaH.	Embedding	R&D	in	sample	preparation	environments	at	large	facilities	also	facilitates	efficient	use	and	allows	sharing	of	good	practice	between	the	facilities	and	new	users.
Skills and training: running training programmes alongside	the	operation	of	multidisciplinary	infrastructures	provides	concentrated	learning	opportunities	for	new	users	to	develop	expertise	quickly,	share	best	practice	and	gain	an	understanding	of	the	techniques	firsthand.	For	example,	Diamond	and	some	of	its	industrial	and	university	users	have	invested	in	joint	appointments.
This	report	focuses	on	opportunities	for	step-changes	in	capability	through	new	infrastructures	or	major	upgrades	to	existing	capability.	However,	it	is	also	important to maintain existing facilities	so	they	can	continue	to	serve	their	large	community	of	researchers	from	the	UK	and	overseas.		
Tensioning development, operation and decommissioning	of	infrastructures	is	a	challenge	for	all	sectors	(Chapter	10)	but	is	particularly	relevant	for	the	large-scale,	multidisciplinary	facilities	due	to	their	scale,	longevity	and	the	often	high	costs	associated	with	decommissioning.	For	example,	the	UK	currently	faces	challenges	to	accommodate	the	cost	of	decommissioning	of	older	infrastructures	where	that	process	is	itself	a	major	undertaking	over many years.  
Developing improved sample delivery and more automated AI-enabled analysis would allow more	users	to	get	more	useful	data.	For	example,	the	development	of	operando	experiments	at	Diamond	that	are	carried	out	by	scientists	based	at	the	nearby	catalysis	hub	at	the	
131
[Page #135]
better	understand	the	requirement,	strategic	importance,	support	within	the	community	and	ability	to	be	delivered,	whilst	others	are	more	developed and could be implemented sooner.
9.3 Future requirements  and opportunitiesSTFC,	as	the	host	of	the	UK	national,	large-scale,	multidisciplinary	facilities	is	currently	preparing	a	phased	roadmap	for	the	development	of	current	and	future	national	facilities.	The	short	term	would	see	the	construction	of	EPAC,	the	medium	term	could	focus	on	Diamond-II	and	the	ISIS	Neutron	and	Muon	Source	Endeavour	programme,	with	the	possible	longer-term	focus	being	on	a	UK-FEL	and	the	successor	to	ISIS.	International	facilities	will	also	require	long-term	upgrade	plans	to	ensure	they	are	maintained	to	the	highest	possible	standards	and	continue	to	push	the	boundaries	of	the	science	they	support.
Theme 1: Next-generation large-scale, multidisciplinary facilitiesThe	ability	to	analyse	complex	structures	in	more	detail and over time is increasingly important across	a	variety	of	disciplines.	We	need	to	invest	in	a	variety	of	capabilities	including	both	major	upgrades	and	new	infrastructures	that	may	include	synchrotrons,	lasers,	FELs,	X-rays,	neutron	reactors	or	spallation	sources.	This	will	likely	require	UK	participation	in	flagship,	international	projects	as	well	as	provision	of	national	capabilities.	There	are	many	options	for	the	UK	to	consider	in	this	area	such	as	the	opportunity	to	invest	in	fourth	generation	synchrotrons	or	the	next-generation	of	lasers.	Many	of	these	options	will	also	open	doors	to	potential	commercialisation	of	technologies	invented	as	part	of	their	development.	
Although	the	construction	phase	for	any	upgrade	or	new	facility	project	may	be	many	years	away	(construction	for	the	successor	to	ISIS	may	not	begin	before	2030),	the	technical	challenges	associated	with	their	design	and	construction	also	require	significant	R&D	many	years	in	advance.	For	example,	the	initial	R&D	to	explore	technical	options	for	the	Diamond-II	upgrade	started	in	2014,	ten	years	ahead	of	any	likely construction starting.
In	some	cases,	in	order	to	provide	a	cost-effective	solution	to	capability	provision,	sunsetting	of	activities	may	need	to	be	considered.	Tensioning	across	the	capabilities	on	offer	is	also	often	needed	and	should	influence	the	investment	options	considered.	Monitoring	of	benefits	and	continual	appraisal	of	new	and	existing	infrastructures	will	allow	transparent	decision-making	across	the	portfolio.
The	following	tables	set	out	potential	future	requirements	for	both	major	upgrades	to	our	existing	large-scale	facilities	and	options	for	new	capability,	building	on	feedback	received	since	the	publication	of	the	Progress	Report.	These	are	at	different	stages	of	development.	Some	opportunities	need	further	work	to	
CASE STUDY: Exporting laser technologies 
The	Diode	Pumped	Optical	Laser	for	Experiments	(DiPOLE)	laser	developed	and	built	by	the	CLF	is	being	exported	to	facilities	across	Europe	including	the	billion	Euro	XFEL	facility	and	the	Czech	Republic’s	HiLASE	project.	The	revolutionary	concept	devised	at	the	CLF’s	Centre	for	Advanced	Laser	Technology	and	Applications	(CALTA)	allows	pump-probing	techniques	to	be	employed	before	samples	are	examined	by	an	X-ray	laser	beam,	allowing	analysis	of	matter	in	extreme	states.	The	laser’s	component	parts	are	designed,	predominantly	manufactured	and	demonstrated	in	the	UK.	Roll-Royce	is	collaborating	with	CLF	to	find	out	if	the	DiPOLE	laser	could	be	effective	for	driving	an	optimized	residual	stress	profile	deep	beneath	the	surface	to	maximize	the	lifetime	of	core component engine parts in service.
The	pioneering	DiPOLE	D100-X	laser	system,	developed	by	CLF,	under	final	test	prior	to	its	shipment	to	the	European	X-ray	Free	Electron	Laser	(European	XFEL)	Facility	in	Hamburg,	Germany.
FLC
132
[Page #136]
Theme 1: Next-generation large-scale multidisciplinary infrastructures
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
ISIS	Endeavour
Endeavour	is	a	portfolio	of	neutron	and	muon	instruments	optimised	to	deliver	significant	and	transformative	impact.	Development	of	a	suite	of	instruments	would	support	neutron	and	muon	capabilities	at	ISIS	Neutron	and	Muon	Source	enabling:	transformation	in	future	materials;	smart,	flexible	and	clean	energy	technologies;	advanced	manufacturing;	and	advances	in	biosciences	and	healthcare.
The	experimental	capabilities	could	support	the	missions	of	the	Faraday	Battery	Challenge,	the	Henry	Royce	Institute	and	the	Rosalind	Franklin	Institute	and	complement	capabilities	at	Diamond.
The	Endeavour	portfolio	together	with	the	expertise	of	ISIS	Neutron	and	Muon	Source	staff	and	the	UK	user	community	would	maintain	and	enhance	the	UK’s	competitiveness.
High-power	laser	facilities	
We	would	deliver	a	globally	unique	capability	of	high-powered	lasers	using	a	range	of	new	technologies	to	fulfil	the	needs	of	the	UK	scientific	community.
Further	work	is	needed	to	scope	the	precise	details	of	a	forward	programme,	but	there	are	a	number	of	potential	opportunities	including	a	national	investment	in	Vulcan	2020	–	an	upgrade	to	the	existing	infrastructure	delivering	a	twenty-fold	increase	in	power	and	other	related	capability,	and	options	for	UK	involvement	in	other	international	capabilities	(including	ELI).
Diamond-II	
A	major	upgrade	to	Diamond	would	increase	brightness	and	coherent	flux	at	higher	energies	and	deliver	a	step-change	in	the	current	capabilities	at	the	UK’s	synchrotron,	keeping	it	competitive	with	international	facilities	such	as	the	ESRF.	Strongly	enhanced	horizontal	emittance	of	the	electron	beam	would	lead	to	a	dramatic	increase	in	the	brilliance	and	coherence	fraction	of	the	photon	beam	and	could	create	significant	opportunities	for	a	number	of	branches	of	applied	science	(e.g.	the	design	and	optimisation	of	materials	and	pharmaceuticals).	Such	technical	upgrades	could	collectively	offer	orders	of	magnitude	improvement	in	resolution	in	time	and	space	for	imaging	and	tomography,	incorporating	spectroscopic	(high-sensitivity,	chemically	specific)	information	and	could	support	missions	of	the	Faraday	Institution	and	the	Rosalind	Franklin	Institute.
A	science	case	has	been	developed	with	support	from	the	Diamond	community	and	an	independent	review	of	the	feasibility	of	the	machine	upgrade	has	been	undertaken	with	international	experts.
HiLUX	(ultrafast	structure and dynamics	at	RCaH)
HiLUX	is	an	instrument	development	programme	for	the	Ultra	and	Artemis	lasers	at	the	RCaH	to	create	a	unique	centre	for	ultrafast	vibrational,	electronic	and	extreme	ultraviolet	spectroscopy	and	imaging.	The	facility	would	correlate	the	ultrafast	dynamic	interactions	between	electrons	and	nuclei	and	explore	the	role	this	has	in	relation	to	structure	and	dynamics	in	chemistry,	physics	and	biology	at	the	quantum	level.	Core	applications	include	energy,	catalysis	and	healthcare.	A	user	community	consultation	could	confirm	the	science	need.
133
[Page #137]
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Free	Electron	Lasers	(FEL)
A	national	FEL	facility	would	enable	a	wide	range	of	research	in	the	life,	material	and	physical	sciences.	We	will	update	the	FEL	science	case	in	light	of	experience	with	currently	operating	FELs	and	other	capabilities.	The	outcomes	of	this	process	will	determine	next	steps.	A	decision	will	be	made	in	mid-2020.	Future	options	could	include	a	test-bed	as	part	of	conceptual	design,	should	a	decision	to	work	towards	constructing	a	UK	FEL	be	made.
Successor	to	ISIS
A	successor	facility	to	ISIS	Neutron	and	Muon	Source	would	fulfil	the	European	need	for	neutrons	when	other	facilities	are	closing.	According	to	the	ESFRI	Physical	Sciences	and	Engineering	Strategy	Working	Group	there	could	be	a	‘neutron	drought’	in	Europe	and	the	group	recommends	that,	for	Europe	to	equate	to	the	US	and	Japanese	short-pulse	neutron	sources	(SNS	and	J-PARC,	the	most	cost-effective	solution	would	be	to	build	a	MW-class	short	pulse	facility	at	ISIS	Neutron	and	Muon	Source.	This	would-be	complementary	to	ESS	and	provide	enhanced	neutron	capacity	in	Europe	beyond	2030.
Development	of	smaller	infrastructures	which	provide	additional	capacity	would	also	allow	the	larger,	more	expensive	capabilities	to	focus	on	the	research	where	their	unique	capabilities	are	most essential. 
Theme 2: Maximising our investments in multidisciplinary facilitiesThe	potential	of	existing	large-scale,	multidisciplinary	facilities	could	be	enhanced	by	step-changes	in	technologies	and	increasing	connectivity	between	infrastructures.	
Theme 2: Maximising our investments in multidisciplinary facilities
How this area can be progressed/indicative approaches
Imaging	at	the	Harwell	Campus
The	Harwell	Campus	is	already	a	centre	of	excellence	in	imaging	and	associated	underpinning	technologies,	but	the	infrastructure	and	expertise	is	currently	dispersed	across	various	facilities	and	technology	departments.	A	coordinated	approach	to	developing	new	imaging	technologies	for	the	Harwell	facilities,	including	correlative	imaging,	would	provide	the	UK	with	a	world-leading	capability	for	imaging	and	enable	transformational	advances	across	the	life	and	physical	sciences.
UK	platform	for	experimental data analysis
There	is	an	increasing	gap	developing	between	our	ability	to	experimentally	take	measurements	(on	large-scale	infrastructures	through	to	medium-scale	facilities)	and	then	to	be	able	to	thoroughly	analyse	them,	i.e.	we	can	‘measure	lots	and	analyse	little’.	Creation	of	a	new	platform	would	support	data	collection	and	use	at	full	potential.	With	increasing	data	production,	it	is	important	to	be	able	to	make	the	most	efficient	and	effective	use	of	these	outputs	and	maximise	the	potential	of	our	investments.	Specialised	data-handling	mechanisms	and	people	skills	would	produce	tools	that	can	increase	access	to	and	usage	of	the	huge	volume	of	data	produced	at	large	facilities	and	therefore	increase	cost-efficiency.
134
[Page #138]
CASE STUDY:  UK-XFEL Life Sciences hub – bridging the gap to European facilities
The	UK	is	a	world	leader	in	protein	crystallography,	a	technique	that	has	revolutionised	biology.	It	has	led	to	effective	treatments	for	HIV,	new	antibiotics,	new	vaccines	(including	progress	on	foot-and-mouth	disease),	several	Nobel	Prizes	and	with	the	breakthrough	in	the	structure	of	G	protein-coupled	receptors,	whole	new	families	of	medicines.	XFELs	can	be	used	for	protein	crystallography	by	allowing	structures	to	be	determined	from	nanocrystals	just	a	few	unit	cells across. 
UK-XFEL	Life	Sciences	Hub	based	at	Diamond	helps	the	UK	research	community	build	the	required expertise to use structural biology facilities	at	the	European	XFEL	in	Hamburg.	In-house	experts	work	with	researchers	preparing	to	run	experiments	at	the	European	XFEL,	for	example providing training and making sure experimental	samples	are	suitable	and	flight-ready	before	sending	them	off	for	transit.	There	are	plans	for	a	dedicated	fibre-optic	link	from	Hamburg	to	the	Harwell	Campus	which	will	allow	researchers	to	carry	out	data	analysis	back	in	the	UK.	This	would	maximise	use	of	the	allocated	time	at	the	international	facility.	
e
lli
vrO
.
Mne
ll
A
Close	up	of	some	of	the	apparatus	for	the	laser	illumination	of	samples	at	the	LCLS/MFX	instrument.
135
[Page #139]
Chapter 10: Evolving and connecting the landscape
136Gerd Altmann from Pixabay
[Page #140]
Building and enhancing connections between infrastructures supports cross-sectoral working and more productive and efficient use of our collective capability. Many challenges or questions can only be addressed by bringing together unique combinations of partners and expertise from across academia, business, government and nations. Our aim is to build a more connected landscape and enhance our capability through partnership-working at all scales.
The	sector	chapters	have	already	described	how	parts	of	the	landscape	are	well	connected	but	this	connectivity	is	not	consistent	and	so	there	is	the	scope	to	more	fully	exploit	our	collective	potential.	Connectivity	is	important	at	all	scales,	from	localised	clusters	to	global	collaborations.	It	can	be	fostered	in	many	ways	by	funders	and	influencers,	e.g.	through	the	use	of	networks,	formal	partnerships	and	collaborations,	strategic	investment	and	training	of	staff	(Figure	20).	
However,	success	also	requires	a	proactive	research	and	innovation	community	able	and	ready to take on any opportunities available. What	works	is	tightly	linked	to	the	lifecycle	of	an	infrastructure,	the	culture	of	different	research	or	business	communities	and	the	maturity	of	the	research	field.	Any	step-change	in	connectivity	requires	support	alongside	the	core	investment	in	the	infrastructures	themselves.
Regona
InstitutionalRegionalNational
InstitutionalRegional
i
Collaborationsand partnerships
Agreementsand policies
a t a            A c c ess        Networks        
NationalInternational
l
International
pute        D
T
r
Research
a
i
Research
Value for moneyStep change inresearch
n
i
Efficiency/effectiveness
moC
InnovationGovernment
n
Strategies
g
Discipline
Industry
Scientificbenefits
Economicbenefits
AccessTraining
ecnanrevo
National
International
Serv
Societalbenefits
National
Standards andgood practices
Funding andprocesses
ResearchInnovation
International
i
c
e
s
Academia
Interdiscipline
e r v ations        G
T
e
Innovation
c
Accelerateeconomic growthReduce risk
Nationa
h
Products/services
n
People andculture
olo
gies       Monitorin g  
s
    O b
l
How
What/why
Enablers
Outputs
Figure	20.	Levers	for	enhancing	connectivity	across	the	infrastructure	landscape.
research	infrastructures	and	is	involved	in	just	under	half	of	the	eighteen	ESFRI	projects	(preparatory	phase)	and	three	quarters	of	the	thirty-seven	landmarks	(implementation	phase).	The	ESFRI	Roadmap29	demonstrates	the	 strong	commitment	of	the	UK	to	ESFRI	 research	infrastructures,	with	the	UK	being	a	prospective	member	in	three	of	the	six	new	projects.	The	UK	is	also	an	active	member	of	 the	Group	of	Senior	Officials,	established	by	the	G8	Science	Ministers	in	2008	to	informally	explore cooperation opportunities in global research	infrastructures.	
10.1 International collaborationThe	Smith	Review	is	a	timely	reminder	that	research	and	innovation	are	international	endeavours.	The	UK	has	a	long	history	of	international	collaboration	benefitting	from	and	ensuring	the	sharing	of	knowledge,	expertise,	data	and	capability	across	organisations,	borders	and	continents.	Many	infrastructures	are	too	big,	complex	or	expensive	for	a	single	country	to	build	and	manage	alone	and	their	creation	requires	strong	partnerships	between	governments	as	well	as	academia.	The	UK	 is	a	partner	or	leader	in	numerous	ESFRI	
137
[Page #141]
CASE STUDY:  Square Kilometre Array (SKA)
The	SKA	will	be	the	world’s	largest	and	most	sensitive	radio	telescope	array,	with	its	headquarters	at	Jodrell	Bank,	Manchester	and	facilities	in	South	Africa	and	Western	Australia.	Once	operational	in	the	mid-2020s,	it	will	investigate	the	development	of	the	early	Universe	and	provide	insight	on	dark	matter	and dark energy. Scientists and engineers are designing	and	developing	a	system	which	will	require	network	technology	that	will	generate	more	data	traffic	than	the	entire	internet.	As	one	of	the	largest	scientific	endeavours	in	history,	the	SKA	brings	together	a	wealth	of	the	world’s	finest	scientists,	engineers	and	policy-	makers	to	bring	the	project	to	fruition.	
noitasnagrOAKS
i
countries,	including	the	UK,	are	the	cornerstone	of	the	project,	around	100	organisations	across	about	twenty	countries	are	participating	in	the	overall design and development.  
The	founding	treaty	was	signed	on	12th	March	2019,	confirming	the	UK	(Jodrell	Bank)	as	the	global	headquarters	and	facilities	in	South	Africa	and	Western	Australia.	Whilst	ten	member	
The	future	landscape	will	require	further	alignment	of	strategies	amongst	national	governments	to	create	and	stimulate	effective	interconnections	and	drive	further	co-design	and	joint	international	investments	in	infrastructures.	The	Smith	Review	highlights	the	importance	of	enhancing	collaboration	and	previous	chapters	have	set	out	multiple	opportunities for UK participation or hosting of international infrastructures,	for	example	in	bioimaging	and	structural	biology	and	‘omics	technologies’	(p29),	new	telescopes	and	nuclear	physics	facilities	(p51),	heritage	science	(p84),	data	infrastructures	(p71)	and	access	to	international	large-scale	multi-sector	facilities	(Chapter	9,	Section	9.2).	In	doing	this,	it	will	be	important	to	maintain	and	enhance	our	ability	to	attract	infrastructure	activity	and	skills	into	the	UK.	The	government’s	International	Research	and	Innovation	Strategy100	highlights	the	importance	of	global	cooperation	and	includes	leading	UK	and	international	facilities	as	a	cornerstone	of	future	requirements	and	investment.	The	UK	and	the	EU	have	a	long	track	record	of	jointly	tackling	global	challenges,	with	strong	links	already	in	place	between	our	research	and	innovation	communities.	The	UK	wishes	to	continue	this	committed	collaboration	in	areas	of	shared	interest	through	a	partnership	with	the	EU	covering	research,	science	and	innovation100.
Research	and	innovation	infrastructures	in	the	UK	have	a	strong	and	long	history	of	international	collaborations,	which	facilitate	transnational	access.	Our	Landscape	Analysis	indicates	that	39%	of	infrastructure	users	and	27%	of	staff	come	from	outside	the	UK.	This	is	set	to	continue	and	intensify.	As	the	landscape	becomes	increasingly	interconnected,	there	is	a	growing need to support and facilitate transnational access to world-class infrastructures. 
10.2 Connecting capability at  a national scaleThe	need	to	create	national-scale	capability	through	strategic planning of new, distributed infrastructure or better    linkage of existing infrastructure	is	a	common	theme	across	the	sectors.	These	networks	or	distributed	infrastructures	can	focus	around	a	core	technology	or	methodology	(see	case	study),	a	research	topic	or	an	application.	Success	requires a proactive community engaged in scoping	the	precise	requirements.	This	can	enable	more	effective	use	of	resources,	provides	a	more	coherent	way	to	develop	common	skill	sets,	shares	good	practice	and	can	foster	innovation	in	methods	that	inform	the	planning	of	subsequent	infrastructure.	
138
[Page #142]
CASE STUDY:  Shaping strategic investment in cutting-edge NMR technology
The	development	of	the	first	EPSRC	Nuclear	Magnetic	Resonance	(NMR)	spectroscopy	roadmap	led	to	a	cross-disciplinary	investment	of	£20	million	in	ultra-high-field-strength	NMR	 in	2018.	
This	will	create	two	new	systems	and	a	series	 of	upgrades,	which	are	to	be	linked	together	 as	a	distributed	network	across	eight	universities.	This	increase	in	capacity	and	capability	will	provide	opportunities	for	 research	across	disciplines.	
It	was	made	possible	by	effective	engagement	between	the	Research	Councils,	the	research	community	and	the	supplier	to	deliver	improved	capacity,	capability	and	value	for	money	through	bulk	purchase.	Work	started	in	2012	with	the	development	of	a	community-led	roadmap	identifying	a	national	requirement.
rekurb
Suppliernegotiationsanddecision oninvestments
NMRrequirementsand roadmaprefined.Call for proposalsissued
Initial NMR roadmap identifies need
NMR investment ismade a priority in governmentscience capitalroadmap
2017
2012
2018
2014
For	example,	the	biological	sciences,	health	and	food	and	physical	sciences	and	engineering	sectors	have	both	highlighted	opportunities	to	create	networks	of	advanced	imaging	capability	(p28),	including	mass	spectrometry	(p55)	and	a	network	of	instrumentation	for	sample	preparation	in	techniques	such	as	cryo-EM	or	MRI	(p28-29).	Although	there	is	good	collaboration	across	the	energy	sector,	engagement	has	flagged	the	potential	to	also	create	distributed	infrastructure	to	complement	investments	to	fill	gaps	in	the	landscape	(Chapter	7,	Section	7.2).	There	is	significant	potential	in	the	social	sciences,	arts	and	
humanities	sector	to	improve	the	connectivity	of	data,	resources	and	collections,	and	there	is	the	potential	for	integrated	networks	of	data	repositories	across	a	number	of	critical	themes,	for	example	for	storage	and	access	to	digital	data	(p75).	
These	networks	also	enable	more	effective	connections	to	the	large-scale	facilities,	such	as	Diamond,	through	‘feeder’	instrumentation	(Chapter	9).	This	optimises	experimental	procedures	and	sample	preparation,	making	the	best	use	of	time	available	on	the	most	expensive	infrastructures.	
139
[Page #143]
CASE STUDY:  The UK7T Network: developing an ultra-high-field MRI platform  for biomedical research
Ultra-high-field	MRI	can	scan	human	tissues	with	greater	clarity	than	ever	before,	supporting	the	development	of	morphological	diagnostics	for	key	medical	conditions	including	dementia,	cerebrovascular	disease	and	mental	health.	The	UK7T	Network,	led	by	the	University	of	Nottingham,	links	five	ultra-high-field	MRI	centres	across	the	UK	(Cambridge,	Cardiff,	Glasgow,	Nottingham	and	Oxford)101.	By	using	harmonised	approaches,	such	as	aligning	protocols	for	data-sharing,	the	network	can	effectively	operate	as	one	large	facility,	allowing	it	to	undertake	large-scale	clinical	studies	across	the	UK.	
The	UK7T	Network	is	currently	undertaking	a	large-scale,	multi-site	study	to	create	a	data	set	of	high-resolution	brain	images	from	1,000	healthy	adults.	This	will	create	a	well-curated	repository	of	high-definition	brain	scans	with	rich	annotation	and	metadata	to	identify	detailed	features	of	disease	and	aid	early	diagnostics	and	monitoring	of	disease	progression.	The	UK7T	Network	is	also	creating	links	to	other	UK	
disease	networks,	e.g.	the	Dementias	Platform	UK,	to	create	a	wider	platform	to	share	technical	and	disease-specific	expertise	and	expand	capacity	for	large	and	multi-site	clinical	trials.	
10.3 Clusters and local economiesThe	government’s	Industrial	Strategy10 recognises	places	as	one	of	the	five	foundations	of	productivity,	and	the	importance	of	research	and	innovation	is	clear	throughout	the	Local	Industrial	Strategies	published	to	date.	The	UK’s	distributed	network	of	research	and	innovation	infrastructures	can	act	as	a	catalyst	for	the	formation	and	growth	of	sector-focused	connected	clusters	of	research-intensive	businesses	and	organisations,	which	can	drive	local,	regional	and	national	economic	growth.	Formation	of	localised	clusters	around	one	or	more	infrastructures	helps	maximise	the	benefits	from	investment.	Clusters	represent	a	distinct,	focused,	connected	critical	mass	of	research	and	innovation	infrastructures,	researchers	and	businesses	in	close	geographical	proximity.	Clusters	enable	rapid	knowledge	exchange,	drive	innovation,	create	partnerships	and	generate	both	localised	and	national	economic	benefits.	This	agglomeration	of	organisations	throughout	a	value	chain	can	attract	new	high-growth	business,	skilled	people	and	investors	to	the	cluster,	fostering	further	growth,	boosting	local	employment	and	enabling	cross-sector	working.	A	cluster	will	reach	a	
critical	mass	once	a	number	of	businesses	and	research	organisations	have	embedded	into	a	region	so	that	it	becomes	a	location	of	choice	for	new	businesses,	who	can	exploit	the	networks	and	connections	to	rapidly	grow	and	scale	their	enterprise	using	an	established	platform.	This	community	of	innovative	disruptive	companies	also	acts	as	an	attractor	for	established	businesses	and	novel	research	activities	as	well	as	inward	investment	in	that	sector.	Over	time,	this	can	create	an	innovation	infrastructure	and	an	ecosystem	that	is	greater	than	the	sum	of	its	parts,	with	a	strong	reputation	for	capability	and	collective	knowledge	that	can	be	leveraged	to	attract	further	business	and	inward	investment.	
Research	and	innovation	campuses	can	drive	the	formation	of	dynamic	connected	clusters	such	as	those	at	the	Harwell	Campus,	Daresbury,	Culham,	Babraham,	Norwich,	Easter	Bush,	Rothamsted	and	Aberystwyth.	Built	around	world-leading	research	infrastructure	and	capabilities,	the	campuses	are	creating	dynamic innovation ecosystems connecting skills,	capability,	finance	and	customers	to	drive	the	commercialisation	of	technologies	and	innovation	arising	from	the	research	base.	
140
[Page #144]
Productive economic clusters can also emerge around	a	university	or	group	of	universities	(e.g.	high-performance	computing	at	the	University	of	Edinburgh	or	the	University	of	Cambridge’s	biosciences	cluster),	a	large	company	or	public	sector	establishment	(e.g.	a	hospital	with	unique	
capability,	defence	establishment).	The	Science	and	Innovation	Audits	commissioned	by	BEIS102 are	helping	local	and	regional	areas	to	map	their	research	and	innovation	strengths	and	identify	areas	of	potential	global	competitive	advantage.
CASE STUDY: East Bank: a developing creative cluster
East	Bank	in	London	is	one	of	the	UK’s	fastest-growing	creative	communities	and	one	of	the	most ambitious new culture and education districts	in	the	world.	Over	2,500	jobs	are	expected	to	be	created	across	the	East	Bank	development,	generating	an	estimated	£1.5	billion	for	the	local	economy.	Situated	in	some	of	London’s	fastest-growing	and	most	diverse	boroughs,	founding	partners	include	University	of	Arts	London’s	College	of	Fashion,	a	new	venue	for	Sadler’s	Wells,	new	BBC	studios	and	UCL	EAST,	a	new	campus	focused	on	art,	society	 and	technology.
Institution,	producing	innovative	exhibitions	and a jointly curated programme bridging arts,	sciences,	design	and	the	humanities,	as	well	as	collaborative	research.	The	Collection	and	Research	Centre	will	be	a	unique	storage	facility	housing	250,000	objects	and	over	900	archives	spanning	the	breadth	of	the	V&A	collections,	from	textiles	and	fashion	to	furniture,	sculpture,	theatre	and	performance.	The	goal	is	to	revolutionise	access	to	the	V&A’s	unique	collections	through	creative	design	of	the	facilities.	A	public	network	will	enable	visitors	to	go	behind	the	scenes	to	discover	the	collections	and	watch	research	in	progress.	The	centre	aims	to	serve	as	an	experimental	‘lab’	enabling	innovative	research	and	modes	of	engagement	and	sharing	the	V&A’s	collections	in	ways	that	have	not	previously	been	possible.	
The Victoria and Albert Museum (V&A) East –	 a	new	Waterfront	Museum	and	a	new	Collection	and	Research	Centre	–	is	currently	taking	shape	at	East	Bank.	The	Museum	will	host	a	pioneering	partnership	with	the	Smithsonian	
muesuMA&V
141
[Page #145]
The	development	of	a	cluster	can	be	catalysed	or	stimulated,	but	it	is	often	an	organic	process	that	is	dependent	on	a	number	of	factors.	Geographical	location	might	be	the	most	important	factor	–	for	example	a	coastal	location	might	be	essential	–	but	the	history	of	a	locality	is	also	a	critical	attractor	so	that	new	infrastructure	or	businesses	can	draw	on	the	historical	expertise,	knowledge,	networks	and	wider	support	that	is	already	present	in	a	region.	The	availability	of	critical	skills	(e.g.	at	the	local	university,	or	through	the	local	training	landscape)	is	often	cited	by	business	as	a	key	factor	in	location	decisions103.	Close	working	between local and national partners to support and	broker	development	of	novel	partnerships	can	also	enhance	cluster	formation104.
across	the	UK.	The	UK	Research	and	Innovation	Strength	in	Places	Fund105	supports	consortia	of	research	organisations	and	businesses	to	foster	innovation-led	economic	growth	in	the	target	geographies.	A	shortlist	of	twenty-three	projects	has	been	announced	for	wave	1,	and	following	a	second	assessment	stage	in	late	2019,	UK	Research	and	Innovation	expects	to	fund	up	to	eight	of	these	from	2020.	The	expression	of	interest	call	for	Wave	2	bids	was	launched	in	May	2019	and	this	model	has	the	potential	to	support	further	waves,	subject	to	funding	availability.	UK	Research	and	Innovation	also	supports	a	number	of	sector-specific	programmes	such	as	AHRC’s	Creative	Industries	Clusters	programme,	which	aims	to	increase	connectivity	between	the	UK’s	creative	industries	and	universities	through	an	£80	million	investment	in	eight	new	creative	 R&D	partnerships.
UK	Research	and	Innovation	and	government	PSREs	support	or	form	innovative	clusters	
CASE STUDY: Harwell Space Cluster
The	Harwell	Space	Cluster	includes	89	space	organisations	employing	950	people	(adding	150	new	jobs	last	year).	The	cluster	brings	together	companies	developing	technology	to	go	into	space,	those	developing	applications	to	solve	global	challenges	and	those	taking	space	technology	to	new	market	sectors.	This	includes	multinationals	such	as	Airbus	and	Lockheed	Martin,	and	SMEs	such	as	Oxford	Space	Systems	and	Rezatec.		
Access	to	facilities	such	as	Diamond;	ISIS	Neutron	and	Muon	Source:	design,	test	and	validation	facilities	at	RAL	Space:	and	the	ESA	Climate	Office:	provides	additional	opportunities	for	companies	establishing	a	presence	at	the	Harwell	Campus.	New	facilities	such	as	the	National	Satellite	Test	Facility	at	RAL	Space	and	the	Satellite	Applications	Catapult’s	Disruptive	Innovation	for	Space	Centre	are	being	developed	in	response	to	demand	from	organisations	that	are	already	part	of	the	cluster	and	are	proving	an	attractor	for	inward	investment.
The	Space	Cluster	coalesced	around	the	longstanding space instrumentation activities of	STFC-RAL	Space.	The	arrival	of	the	European	Space	Agency	(ESA)	in	2009,	the	launch	of	the	ESA	Business	Incubation	Centre	in	2010	and	Satellite	Applications	Catapult	in	2013	(building	on	the	International	Space	Innovation	Centre	set	up	in	2011),	along	with	UK	Space	Agency	opening	an	office,	established	the	Harwell	Space	Cluster	as	the	gateway	to	the	UK	space	sector.	
Building	on	this	success,	additional	clusters	in	HealthTec	and	EnergyTec	have	been	established	at	the	Harwell	Campus	by	STFC	which	provide	potential customer bases and multidisciplinary collaboration	opportunities.	Growth	has	been	supported	through	the	establishment	of	a	public-private	partnership.	This	ensures	the	focus	of	the	Space	Campus	is	as	an	R&D	centre	that	continues	to	drive	the	development	of	the	 unique ecosystem. 
142
[Page #146]
organisations	and	the	public.	Research	located	in	hospitals,	schools,	museums,	other	public	services and local communities is vital to addressing	many	of	the	challenges	described	in	this	report.	This	may	call	for	different	uses	of	space	and	staff	time	and	special	governance	or	co-development	of	plans	for	service	change	and	evaluation.	The	current	and	future	commitment	of	public	service	organisations	to	these	partnerships	is	vital	for	the	UK’s	competitiveness	in	these	areas.		
10.4 Creating connectivityA	range	of	mechanisms	are	used	to	create	connectivity	at	all	scales	in	the	landscape,	with	examples	of	good	practice	across	the	UK	and	internationally. 
Collaborations and partnerships	are	the	bedrock	for	connecting	research	and	innovation	across	the	academic,	business,	charities	and	public	sectors.	The	effectiveness	of	infrastructures	in	some	sectors	often	depends	on	the	support	and	goodwill	of	businesses,	public	service	
CASE STUDY:  Cell and Gene Therapy Catapult
Cell	and	gene	therapies	rely	on	modifying	biological activity to restore or install functionality	by	introducing	healthy	cells,	modified	cells	or	new	genetic	material.	Recently,	some	of	the	biggest	strides	in	the	cell	and	gene	therapy	industry	have	been	in	oncology,	where	some	therapies	have	already	received	approval	in	the	USA	and	Europe.	In	the	past	six	years	the	UK	has	seen	a	growth	from	twenty-two	to	over	seventy	cell	and	gene	therapy	developers	and	attracted	more	than	£2.5	billion	investment	in	with	an	increase	from	twenty-one	to	over	eighty	active clinical trials.
collaborative operating model allows companies to	develop	their	manufacturing	processes	at	scale,	to	Good	Manufacturing	Practice	standards	and	underpinned	by	end-to-end	expertise	and	practical	support	from	experts	across	scientific	research,	manufacturing,	supply	and	regulation.	The	modular	nature	of	the	facility	allows	companies	to	expand	and	add	additional	collaborations,	for	instance	viral	vector	manufacturing	as	well	as	cell	product	manufacture.	
There	are	currently	five	companies	developing	their	manufacturing	processes	at	the	centre.	TCR2	was	the	first	US	company	to	have	committed,	joining	Adaptimmune,	Autolus	(both	of	which	have	now	reached	unicorn	status),	CellMedica	and	Freeline.	2019	will	see	the	opening	of	an	additional	six	clean	rooms	for	manufacturing	which	will	increase	the	capacity	of	the	centre	to	support	the	growth	of	companies.
The	Cell	and	Gene	Therapy	Catapult	based	in	London	seeks	to	provide	a	platform	for	cell	and	gene	therapy	companies	to	grow	and	flourish	in	the	UK.	The	Catapult’s	manufacturing	centre	opened	in	Stevenage	in	April	2018	backed	by	over	£60	million	in	investment	from	the	UK	government’s	Industrial	Strategy.	Its	unique	
krowteN
tlupataC
143
[Page #147]
CASE STUDY:  UKRPIF and the High Temperature Research Centre (HTRC)
The	UK	Research	Partnership	Investment	Fund	(UKRPIF)	encourages	strategic	partnerships	between	HEIs	and	other	organisations.	Since	its	establishment	in	2012	it	has	provided	over	£900	million	to	fifty-four	research	projects	attracting	£2.2	billion	in	double-match	funding	from	non-public	sources106.	The	HTRC	is	a	unique	world-class	casting,	design,	simulation	and	manufacturing	research	facility	established	by	the	University	of	Birmingham	in	partnership	with	Rolls-Royce.	The	centre	was	established	with	£20	million	in	funding	from	the	UKRPIF	and	£40.3	million	from	Rolls-Royce.	It	focuses	on	underpinning	materials	research,	radical	 process improvements and predictive  processing modelling. 
The	key	to	raising	the	TRL	at	which	research	works	has	been	equipping	the	centre	to	the	level	of	a	Rolls-Royce	plant,	with	considerable	input	from	Rolls-Royce.	Research	can	quickly	be	tested	in	manufacturing	processes	without	disrupting	the	highly	automated	production	processes	of	an	operational	plant.	
The	centre	can	demonstrate	new	manufacturing	capabilities	that	significantly	reduce	the	time	to	design	and	manufacture	components	for	engine	development	programmes.	For	example,	the	first	HTRC	programme	achieved	13	months	from	start	of	design	to	delivery	of	test	hardware.	It	has	also	allowed	new	training	opportunities,	with	apprentices,	Rolls-Royce	staff	and	researchers	co-located	and	working	together	within	a	facility	that	can	operate	at	significant	scale.
Equipment-sharing initiatives support investment in	higher-specification	capability,	enabling	a	wider	range	of	research	and	creating	management	efficiencies.	Clusters	of	research-intensive	universities	have	implemented	instances	of	more	formal	asset-	sharing,	e.g.	the	N8	or	Midlands	Innovation.	Networks	of	cutting-edge	precision	equipment,	such	as	those	established	through	the	Clinical	Research	Capabilities	and	Technology	Initiative107,	are	designed	to	be	in	close proximity to clinical investigation and care facilities	in	order	to	effectively	advance	clinical	research.	However,	barriers	to	tax-efficient	sharing	of	facilities	remain108. 
Funding community networks	has	successfully	catalysed	integration	of	distributed	capability.	In	the	UK,	BioimagingUK109	–	a	multi-funder	network	(BBSRC,	EPSRC,	MRC,	the	Wellcome	Trust)	–	together	with	facility	managers	meetings	and	learned	societies,	has	led	to	the	sharing	of	good	practice	within	the	bioimaging	research	community.	This	includes	training	guides,	technical	expertise	and	the	establishment	of	a	central	database	of	microscopy	facilities,	hosted	by	the	Royal	Microscopical	Society.	The	League	of	European	Accelerator-based	Photon	Sources	(LEAPS)	network	fosters	close	collaboration	between	European	Light	Sources	such	as	the	UK-based	
144
[Page #148]
CASE STUDY: Bridging for Innovators (B4I)
STFC’s	B4I	programme	is	piloting	a	new	approach	to	helping	businesses,	particularly	SMEs,	tackle	their	productivity	challenges	through	access	to	STFC’s	high-tech	scientific	facilities.	Starting	in	late	2017	the	programme	has	received	eighty-nine	business	applications	and	has	been	supporting	twenty-seven	business	users	including	£614,000	in	industrial	match-	funding,	as	of	June	2019111. 
operations.	Even	though	this	device	is	not	safety-critical	to	the	aircraft’s	operation,	it	still	needs	to	pass	vigorous	testing	before	it	can	be	used	commercially.	One	of	these	tests	is	the	resilience	of	the	device	to	neutrons	generated	by	cosmic rays. 
The	ChipIr	beamline	at	ISIS	Neutron	and	Muon	Source	can	test	the	effect	of	many	years	of	exposure to cosmic neutrons in just one day. By	using	ChipIr,	Cobham	were	able	to	identify	any	issues	caused	by	the	radiation	and	ensure	changes	were	made	so	the	equipment	met	the	standards	required.	“Having	access	to	a	world-class	neutron	facility	like	ISIS	here	in	the	UK	is	a	huge	advantage	for	Cobham,”	says	Dr	Richard	Sharp,	the	company’s	Managing	Director.	“The	alternatives	are	located	in	North	America,	so	there	is	a	significant	cost	advantage	in	using	ISIS	for	the	testing	and	qualification	of	our	aerospace	equipment.”
Cobham	RAD	Europe	Ltd	used	ISIS	Neutron	and	Muon	Source’s	ChipIr	beamline	to	bring	a	new	product	–	the	Aviator	S	–	to	market.	This	device	is	intended	primarily	for	communicating	flight	data	between	the	aircraft	and	the	ground	but	has	a	potential	secondary	role	through	its	Passenger	Information	and	Entertainment	Services	(PIES).	
With	this	device,	airline	passengers	would	be	able	to	stay	in	touch	with	social	media	and	emails	without	interrupting	the	aircraft’s	
yabaxPmorfno
i
jli
H
Diamond.	The	LEAPS	Strategy	2030	seeks	to	deliver	better	collective	capability	through	smart	specialisation,	closer	cooperation,	better	engagement	with	industry	and	collective	outreach	to	new	users110.
infrastructure	and	may	involve	peer	review	of	proposals,	be	dependent	on	specific	permissions	(e.g.	medical	infrastructures)	and	in	some	cases	require	transfer	or	digitisation	of	materials	and	resources	(e.g.	museum	collections).	Broadening	access	requires	staff	who	have	the	right	skills	to	engage	and	partner	with	new	users,	trade	bodies	and	businesses,	helping	them	understand	the	infrastructure	capability	and	potential	benefits.	The	Horizon	2020	Transnational	Access	scheme	has	been	successful	in	opening	up	key	national	and	regional	research	and	innovation	infrastructures	to	European	researchers	from	academia and industry. 
Broadening access	to	our	infrastructure	requires	a	combination	of	awareness-raising	and	active	facilitation	and	support.	This	programme	has	focused	on	infrastructures	that	offer	access	beyond	their	individual	institutions,	and	stakeholders	have	emphasised	the	need	to	remove	barriers	and	open	up	or	facilitate	access.	Access	models	depend	on	the	type	of	
145
[Page #149]
Increasing awareness and discoverability: Many	consultees	over	the	course	of	the	programme	commented	on	how	difficult	it	can	be	to	know	what	infrastructure	the	UK	has	to	offer.	This	acts as a barrier to broadening use and building connections.	Tools	can	help	new	users	find	out	what	capability	might	be	available.	The	equipment-sharing	portal	Equipment.data112 supports	the	search	for	equipment	at	a	wide	variety	of	UK	universities	and	the	number	of	contributors	continues	to	grow.	The	National	Centre	for	Universities	and	Business	has	developed	an	online	brokering	tool,	Konfer113,	to	help	businesses	find	the	relevant	expertise	and	assets	they	need	from	within	universities.	UK	Research	and	Innovation	will	also	share	the	data	gathered	on	existing	UK	infrastructures	through	a	portal	alongside	this	report.	
safeguards.	As	we	plan	towards	the	future,	public	engagement and participation will remain a key factor	in	supporting	and	embedding	the	research	and	innovation	culture	in	the	landscape	and	beyond;	reaching	out	to	new	communities	and	sectors	will	enrich	the	landscape	through	these	new	forms	of	connectivity.
10.5 Integrating innovationMany	of	the	challenges	and	themes	outlined	in	this	report	require	the	testing	of	ideas	at	scale	to	show	how	technologies	or	data	might	integrate	or	how	potential	solutions	might	operate	in	the	real	world.	There	are	several	types	of	infrastructure	that	can	help	achieve	this,	including	demonstrators,	test	beds	and	living	labs,	which	support	greater	integration	of	academic,	business,	charitable	or	public	sector	research	and	provide	routes	to	follow	on	funding	and private sector investment114.
Public participation	in	trustworthy	research	programmes	and	infrastructures	is	also	essential.	At	any	one	time,	several	million	UK	citizens	are	participating	in	research	studies,	especially	in	the	social,	environmental	and	health	research	sectors.	Our	research	capabilities	in	these	areas	need	to	reflect	the	diversity	and	rate	of	change	in	our	population,	make	use	of	new	technologies	to	facilitate	richer	data	capture,	facilitate	fuller	participation	of	volunteers	and	ensure appropriate governance and privacy 
Key	objectives	are	to	de-risk	the	development,	scale-up	new	solutions	and	services	and	expose	and	address	barriers	to	implementation.	This	can	give	potential	users	or	markets	(both	public	and	private)	the	confidence	to	invest.	Given the proximity to market, scale and complexity of such infrastructures, partnership-working is often a key feature to bring together all the elements needed for success.
Demonstrators	are	near-market	projects	testing	solutions	in	real-life	conditions	and	taking	a	whole-systems	(cross-sectoral)	approach	to	de-risking	or	scaling-up	implementation.	Given	the	cost	and	proximity	to	market,	they	are	often	collaborations	between	public	and	private	sectors.	Existing	examples	include:
  The	SPECIFIC	Innovation	and	Knowledge	Centre  ISCF-funded	local	energy	system	demonstrators  ISCF-funded	robotics	and	AI	demonstrators
Test beds are	specifically	set	up	to	enable	companies	to	plug	into	infrastructure	that	they	 otherwise	would	not	get	access	to	or	could	not	afford.	They	bring	together	business,	academia	 and	the	public	sector	to	work	with	users	in	co-designing,	testing	and	implementing	new	services.	Existing	examples	include:
  5G	test	beds  The	Digital	Catapult’s	Things	Connected	Network  The	Propulsions	Future	Beacon	test	bed
Living labs	are	user-centred	and	often	based	in	a	particular	geographical	location,	e.g.	a	city,	region	or	landscape.	They	integrate	concurrent	research	and	innovation	processes	within	a	citizen-public-private	partnership	and	may	be	critically	dependent	on	the	commitment	and	capacity	of	organisations	such	as	hospitals,	schools	or	local	authorities.	Existing	examples	include:
  The	Energy	Systems	Catapult	Living	Lab  North	Wyke	Farm	Platform	  The	UKCRIC	Bristol	Infrastructure	Collaboratory
146
[Page #150]
CASE STUDY: Offshore Renewable Energy Catapult
Subsea surveys and inspections are a necessary part	of	maintaining	an	offshore	wind	farm,	but	current	methods	are	laboriously	time-consuming	and	expensive.	Bristol-based	SME	Rovco	deliver	cutting-edge	subsea	survey	services.	Their	pioneering	underwater	live	3D-vision	SubSLAM	technology	provides	offshore	wind	owner/operators	with	a	clearer	and	immediate	picture	of	their	subsea	assets,	with	the	potential	to	lower	the	cost	and	improve	the	quality	of	subsea	inspections	by	80%.	
developers to carry out trials in a controlled subsea	environment,	whilst	experienced	offshore	personnel	and	R&D	technicians	have	the	capabilities	to	replicate	the	conditions	found	on	an	operational	offshore	wind	farm	site,	boosting	bankability	and	investor	confidence	in	innovative	solutions	that	perform	well.	
Rovco	has	since	secured	significant	backing	from	Global	Marine	Group	(GMG)	and	both	companies	will	work	together	to	deliver	a	range	of	efficient,	high-quality	subsea	solutions	to	improve	data	acquisition.	Rovco’s	SubSLAM	technology	will	be	deployed	from	GMG’s	fleet	 of	twenty-one	specialised	crew	transfer	vessels.	With	an	estimated	export	revenue	of	£20	million	per	year,	Rovco’s	subsea	robotics	expertise	has	put	the	firm	in	line	to	become	the	market	leader	in subsea surveying. 
Rovco	secured	grants	from	Innovate	UK	and	private	investment	to	develop	the	3D-vision	camera	system	along	with	AI	integration,	conducting	system	testing	and	validation	at	the	Offshore	Renewable	Energy	Catapult	in	Blyth.	The	Catapult’s	unique	dry-dock	testing	facility	features	a	replica	seabed,	allowing	technology	
tlupataCERO
This	extends	beyond	funding	partnerships	to	in-kind	contributions	such	as	the	sharing	or	use	of	assets	(e.g.	land,	equipment,	data)	between	academic	researchers,	businesses,	national	and	local	government,	public	service	providers	and	the	general	public.	Bespoke	arrangements	are	often	needed	to	ensure	appropriate	governance	and	to	take	account	of	any	regulatory,	legal	or	standards	constraints115. UK	Research	and	Innovation	and	many	PSREs	already	fund	activity	in	this	space.	Over	the	longer term our ambition is to develop more capability	in	this	area;	for	example,	the	biological	sciences,	health	and	food	sector	chapter	highlights	opportunities	for	accelerators	and	small-scale	manufacturing,	quality	control	and	
trial	facilities	bringing	academia,	industry	and	the	NHS	together.	The	physical	sciences	and	engineering	chapter	discusses	the	need	for	higher-TRL	test	beds	and	demonstrators	to	develop	future	transport	solutions	(p61)	and	the	opportunity	for	living	labs	or	demonstrators	to	explore	the	intersection	of	autonomous	vehicles,	smart	infrastructure,	robotics	and	smart	services	(p62).	The	social	sciences,	arts	and	humanities	sector	chapter	discusses	opportunities	for	integrated	environments	which	combine	digital	connectivity	with	physical	spaces,	embracing	new	technologies	to open up new ways to create products and experiences	(p66).	The	Environment	sector’s	requirements include demonstrator or test 
147
[Page #151]
bed	facilities	in	geothermal	energy	and	heat	storage,	CO2 storage and integrated networks of	sensors	forming	‘landscape	laboratories’	to	gather	data	on	our	environment	(p93).	Given	the	proximity	to	market,	the	energy	sector	identified	multiple	opportunities	for	demonstration	and	test	bed	activities	across	the	different	energy	technologies	(Chapter	7).	
through	engagement	with	stakeholders,	including	businesses.	The	ISCF	also	provides	a	mechanism	to	foster	the	development	of	demonstrators,	test	beds	and	living	labs,	as	well	as	considering	other	infrastructure	needs	to	support	a	challenge,	for	example	characterisation	infrastructure	for	the	 Battery	Challenge116. 
There	is	also	scope	to	further	explore	good	practice	in	establishing	such	activity	and	how	best	to	take	forward	some	of	the	ideas	set	out	in	this	report,	many	of	which	are	outside	the	remit	of	any	single	funding	organisation.	One	such	activity	is	that	the	Royal	Academy	of	Engineering,	as	part	of	the	National	Engineering	Policy	Centre,	is	aiming	to	develop	best	practice	in	establishing	and	operating	demonstrators	
Important	infrastructure	may	also	be	located	in	the	private	or	charitable	sectors.	A	recent	mapping	of	industrial	digitalisation	technologies	by	Innovate	UK	and	the	Knowledge	Transfer	Network	captured	both	public	and	private	facilities	with	open	access117.	This	offers	a	potential	approach	to	capturing	a	fuller	picture	of	UK	infrastructure	that	may	be	accessible	to	users	outside	of	individual	companies.
CASE STUDY:  North Wyke Farm Platform:  a ‘living lab’
The	North	Wyke	Farm	Platform	is	a	unique	research	facility	or	‘living	lab’	for	the	study	of	sustainable	livestock	farming	on	grassland,	particularly	beef	cattle	and	sheep	production.	Managed	by	Rothamsted	Research	and	based	near	Okehampton	in	Devon,	the	facility	provides	access	to	a	range	of	state-of-the-art	instrumentation	in	hydrologically	isolated	catchments	and	fields	alongside	remote	access	to	the	data	generated	by	the	facility.	This	supports	research	into	replacement	of	nitrogen	fertilisers	to	reduce	energy	consumption	and	greenhouse	gas	emissions,	use	of	plants	to	manage	soils	and	provide	green-engineered	solutions	to	flooding,	efficient	use	of	water	resources	and	animal	health.	For	example,	the	unique	design	of	this	platform	enabled	researchers	to	link	soil	health,	pasture	value	and	sustainable	livestock	production,	suggesting	that	managing	soil	by	well-designed	grazing	 (e.g.	by	changing	rotational	grazing	patterns)	could improve livestock productivity.
hcraeseRdetsmahtoR
148
[Page #152]
Chapter 11:  Critical enablers and policy issues
149
[Page #153]
Previous chapters have highlighted opportunities for new capability across the landscape, but the full benefits of both new and existing infrastructures will not be realised without addressing critical enablers and challenges. Considerations around skills, data and sustainability were the top barriers to effective operation of infrastructures identified in our Landscape Analysis questionnaires. They are important for infrastructures at all scales and in all sectors. The underpinning policies and approach to the issues will have major impact on how our infrastructures are set up, their scope, their ability to operate and their future sustainability.
science and AI, software engineering	and	the	interface	with	other	disciplines.	The	demand	for	such	skills	will	only	become	more	acute	in	response	to	the	infrastructure	requirements	described	throughout	this	report.	Already	one	in	ten	UK	job	adverts	are	for	professional	data	experts according to a labour market analysis commissioned	by	the	Royal	Society11. Demand has	grown	across	all	levels	of	data	expertise	but	especially	for	advanced	roles.	One	in	two	job	adverts	for	data	scientists	require	machine	learning	(up	3,214%	since	2013)	and	one	in	eight	demand	AI	(up	7,664%	since	2013).
11.1 Skills and training The	availability	of	specialised	skilled	staff	is	critical	to	the	operation	of	infrastructures	across	all	sectors.	This	workforce	is	diverse,	including	research	technicians,	technology	skills	specialists,	infrastructure	managers	and	other	professional	groups.	They	represent	a	significant	proportion	of	the	UK’s	overall	R&D	workforce:	31%	of	the	business	and	10%	of	the	higher	education	workforce	in	2015118	and	36%	of	the	staff	in	the	infrastructures	covered	by	our	Landscape	Analysis.	Public	sector	research	and	innovation	organisations	act	as	both	employers	and	a	training	ground	for	professional	skills	in	the	wider	economy.	UK	Research	and	Innovation	is	a	direct	employer	of	over	2000	research	technology	professionals	within	its	research	and	innovation	facilities,	institutes,	centres	and	campuses. As well as developing and operating the	infrastructure	itself,	these	professionals	perform	other	vital	roles	such	as	data	analysis,	training	others	in	the	use	of	infrastructures,	working	alongside	visiting	research	teams	on	particular projects and developing new and transformative	technologies	and	methodologies.	
The	talent	market	is	global	and	the	UK	is	reliant	on	the	ability	to	attract	overseas	skilled	technical	and	specialist	people	at	all	stages	of	their	career.	39%	of	the	staff	employed	at	the	infrastructures	in	our	Landscape	Analysis	are	from	overseas.	Nearly	90%	of	EU	and	non-EU	technicians	at	Russell	Group	universities	are	skilled	to	National	Qualification	Framework	level	6	and	above	and	25%	hold	a	PhD121,	yet	they	do	not	hold	a	clear	professional	status	under	the	current	Standard	Occupational	Classifications	for	recognition	in	the	Tier	2	visa	system.	This	risks	creation	of	additional barriers to recruitment and retention of	the	expanding	technical	workforce.	
The	challenges around skills recruitment and retention were considered the top barriers to effective operation by infrastructures responding	to	our	questionnaires,	with	resulting	impacts	on	their	ability	to	act	at	capacity.	This	problem	is	growing	as	the	workforce	ages	and	demand	increases.	In	England,	40%	of	the	higher	education	technician	workforce	is	aged	50	or	over,	highlighting	the	challenge	of	succession planning119.	Estimates	from	the	Gatsby	Foundation	indicate	that	the	UK	will	need	700,000	new	technicians	by	2020	to	meet	the	demand	from	employers120. Public sector organisations struggle to provide salaries on a	competitive	level	with	the	private	sector,	universities	and	the	international	market.	Across	the	landscape,	demand	already	exceeds	supply	in	a	number	of	areas	that	have	been	highlighted	through	the	roadmap	programme	in relation to digital and analytical skills, data 
A	long-term	perspective	and	career	track	are	key	to	increasing	the	attractiveness	of	infrastructures	as	employers122 and supporting the	international	mobility	of	specialist	staff.	At	the	institutional	and	national	level,	clarity	of	the	career	path	for	such	professionals	is	often	lacking.	Stakeholders	have	told	us	the	visibility	of	these	professions	is	often	low	and	roles	‘underappreciated’,	whether	that	be	directly	through	lack	of	recognition	of	contributions	to	academic	papers	and	grant	proposals,	or	indirectly	in	terms	of	their	overall	contribution	to	the	management	of	facilities	and	training	of	users123,124.	Further	work	is	needed	to	develop a clear identity for different professional groups. This	includes	clarifying	career structures, options, incentives and training needs	for	these	
150
[Page #154]
CASE STUDY:  Developing technical career roles and pathways: examples across the sectors
The	National Technician Development Centre	provides	organisations	and	technical	communities	with	information,	expertise	and	tools.	This	includes	the	Technical	Development	and	Modernisation	toolkit	developed	as	part	of	a	project	with	eighteen	HEIs	to	identify	the	major	challenges	facing	technical	staff	and	services.	The	toolkit	provides	guidance	on	career	pathways	and	staff	development	to	support	organisations	in	meeting	pledges	made	as	part	of	the	Science	Council’s	Technician	Commitment.
research	facilities.	The	apprentices	work	in	the	laboratories	while	gaining	formal	qualifications	as	lab	technicians.	After	completing	his	training,	the	Centre’s	first	apprentice,	Scott	Neilson,	began	work	at	the	Edinburgh	Genome	Foundry,	one	of	the	largest	automated	genome	assembly	platforms	in	the	UK.	There	he	has	become	indispensable	operating	and	maintaining	the	highly	sophisticated	platform	for	DNA	assembly	and	proving	an	adept	instructor	of	foundry	customers. Scott is currently working towards an	Higher	National	Diploma	and	potentially,	in	the	future,	a	part-time	degree.	
EPSRC	supported	the	research	software	development	community	to	self-identify	as	research	software	engineers	through	the	Research Software Engineering Network and Fellowships. This	raised	awareness	of	the	importance	of	software	development,	brought	the	community	together	and	aided	development	and	retention	of	staff.
yabaxPmorfkuomraJ
i
To	address	the	shortage	of	appropriately	trained	technicians	in	synthetic	biology,	the	UK Centre for Mammalian Synthetic Biology,	based	at	the	University	of	Edinburgh,	is	hiring	school	leavers as modern apprentices in its specialist 
l
l
ahcM
i
professions,	building	on	examples	of	good	practice.	Many	organisations	have	a	role	to	play	in	taking	this	forward	and	work	is	already	under	way	through,	for	example,	the	Technician	Commitment	initiative	led	by	the	Science	Council	and	Gatsby	Foundation125,	through	the	Technical	Development	and	Modernisation	project126	and	through	Higher	Education	and	Technician’s	Educational	Development	(HEaTED)127.	Successful	examples	are	often	led	by	the	professions	themselves	but	this	needs	to	be catalysed and supported.
In	developing	its	Talent	and	Skills	Strategy,	UK	Research	and	Innovation	is	taking	an	overarching	view	on	what	a	healthy	and	thriving	future	research	and	innovation	workforce	will	look	like	and	the	interventions	required	to	support	it.	The	UK	Research	and	Innovation	Statement	of	Expectations	for	technology/skills specialists128	sets	out	the	expectations	of	research	organisations,	UK	Research	and	Innovation	and	individual	technical	staff	to	ensure	parity	of	esteem	between	technical	and	academic	staff	and	access	to	improved	career development and progression opportunities.	Alongside	this,	UK	Research	and	Innovation’s	intention	is	to	engage	with	the	Technician	Commitment	initiative	to	ensure	visibility,	recognition,	career	development	and	sustainability	for	those	professionals	directly	employed	by	the	organisation129. Subject to resource	availability,	there	is	also	the	potential	for	UK	Research	and	Innovation’s	existing	infrastructure	to	act	as	centres	of	excellence	for	training	of	the	next-generation	of	technical	specialists	to	address	skills	gaps,	both	for	our	own	workforce	and	the	wider	economy.	
The	Industrial	Strategy	includes	an	aspiration	to	develop	the	UK’s	technical	skills	base	including	specific	skills	identified	in	the	Grand	Challenge	areas.	The	creation	of	UK	Research	and	Innovation	provides	opportunities	to	work	closely	with	other	stakeholders	and	demonstrate	leadership	by	supporting the development  of the professionals we employ directly and those employed through our work to fund the wider landscape.
151
[Page #155]
The	diversity	of	data	sets	(historical	and	new,	created	for	research	purposes	or	from	non-research	sources)	brings	new	challenges	with	the	potential	to	unlock	value	through	data	linkage.	Chapter	8	set	out	the	need	for	more detailed analysis of research data infrastructure requirements,	including	opportunities	for	sharing	or	co-locating	data	infrastructure	and	services.	
11.2 Data management and accessA	critical	thread	running	through	all	chapters	in	this	report	is	the	rising opportunity for connected, large-scale data	that	can	be	readily	analysed	to	generate	insights	and	innovation.	This	explosion	in	‘big	data’	comes	as	the	use	of	numerical	and	predictive	simulations	rises	to increase accuracy or to interpret data over longer timescales or across greater scales. Advanced	statistical	techniques	such	as	machine	learning	can	be	transformative	but	larger data sets will require advanced computing facilities	and	new	skill	sets	as	discussed	in	Chapter	8.	
Any	analysis	of	infrastructure	requirements	needs	to	go	hand	in	hand	with	developments	in	data	policy.	Data	access	should	be	as	open	as	possible	and	as	closed	as	necessary,	and	fully	consider	personal,	commercial	and	security	issues.	The	development of Open Science and Open Data	policies	has	meant	that	there	are	greater	efforts	to	make	research,	government	and	private	sector	data	open	and	available	for	use.	This	desire	for	openness,	coupled	with	advances in data analytics and associated technologies,	is	a	key	driver	of	innovative	practice	and	new	infrastructure	opportunities.	The	Open	Data	Institute	recently	launched	the	findings	of	its	data	trust	programme,	finding	huge	demand	for	legal	structures	that	provide	independent	stewardship	of	data130. 
The	data landscape is complex and multi-layered.	Researchers	and	innovators	require:	infrastructures	that	can	share	data	in	accessible	formats;	data	environments	where	large	and	complex	data	can	be	analysed,	integrated,	visualised	and	managed;	and	databases	that	allow	the	ready	upload	or	download	of	data.	All	sector	chapters	in	this	report	include	opportunities	for	infrastructure	capability	that	will	generate	new	data	and	support	analysis,	building	on	our	existing	data	infrastructure.	
CASE STUDY:  Archaeology Data Service (ADS) as a world-leading data repository 
The	Archaeology	Data	Service	(ADS)	is	a	world-leading	digital	heritage	data	archive	that	has	been	leading	the	development	of	digital	preservation	since	1996134.	It	engages	with	the	preservation community about developments in data policy and good practice in data repository creation and management. 
The	ADS	is	the	deputy	lead	of	the	Advanced	Research	Infrastructure	for	Archaeological	Dataset	Networking	in	Europe.	This	international	research	infrastructure	fosters	collaboration,	data	interoperability	and	infrastructure	connectivity.	In	2019	it	established	Saving	European	Archaeology	from	a	Digital	Dark	Age,	a	new	four-year	action	with	thirty	Partner	Countries.	The	ADS	is	also	driving	the	development	of	data	policy	for	the	European	Research	Infrastructure	for	Heritage	Science	(E-RIHS),	part	of	an	emerging	global	distributed	research	infrastructure.	Through	these	international	research	collaborations,	the	ADS	is	pioneering	new	ways	of	managing	and	curating	complex	data	and	developing	a	shared	evidence	base	for	interdisciplinary	research	to	ensure	the	integrity,	reliability	and	accessibility	of	complex data. 
ll
edneRneeH
l
forP
,
egdiraCadnamAforP
l
In	2012	the	ADS	was	awarded	the	Digital	Preservation	Coalition’s	Decennial	Award	for	the	most	outstanding	contribution	to	digital	preservation	of	the	decade.	
Photograph	of	a	brick	found	during	one	of	the	excavations.	It	bears	a	stamp	with	Caesar	Augustus’	name	dating	it	to	between	27	BC	and	14	AD.
152
[Page #156]
Open Data policies are being developed across funders	to	support	the	development	of	a	culture	where	sharing	data	is	part	of	the	research	process.	The	development	of	the	concept	of	FAIR	data131	has	transformed	expectations	around	both	sharing	and	the	management	of	data,	and	the	concept	is	being	extended	further	(for	example,	into	software).	UK	Research	and	Innovation	has	developed	common	principles	on data policy132	and	the	Open	Research	Data	Concordat	working	with	other	stakeholders,	e.g.	Universities	UK133.	UK	Research	and	Innovation	Councils	have	comprehensive	Open	Data	policies	and	support	the	use	of	data	management plans. Work is currently ongoing to	harmonise	the	Data-Sharing	Policies	and	review	UK	Research	and	Innovation’s	policy	on	open	access	to	publication	outputs.	Research	Data	Management	and	Open	Data	policies	need	to	be	developed	in	partnership	with	data	infrastructure	providers	and	users.	A more detailed assessment of the requirements for implementing the FAIR principles within each sector is needed. 
UK	Research	and	Innovation	will	continue	to	work	with	other	external	organisations,	particularly	those	that	also	support	infrastructure	(such	as	the	Wellcome	Trust	and	Jisc),	to	develop	its	Open	Research	Data	Strategy. UK Research and Innovation will also consider developing a strategy for Data Access, building	on	this	existing	work	and	considering	opportunities	for	sharing	and	co-locating	infrastructures	and	services,	alongside	engaging	in	the	work	of	the	G7	around	a	global	agenda	on	an	Open	Science	Cloud.	
11.3 Sustainability of infrastructuresResearch	and	innovation	infrastructures	are	long-term	investments.	Infrastructures	need	to	be	sustainable	not	just	in	terms	of	funding	but	also	organisationally,	technically	and	in	terms	of	their	human	resources.	They	also	need	to	be	responsive	to	changes	in	user	needs	and	disruption	from	new	technologies,	evolving	and	developing	their	approach	over	the	course	of	their	lifecycle.	In	some	cases	infrastructures	have	a	finite	lifetime	before	user	needs	and	
CASE STUDY:  Evolving the infrastructure landscape: accelerator science
Synchrotron	Radiation	Source(SRS)	facility	operational1990-2008
The	Accelerator	Science	and	Technology	 Centre	(ASTeC)	was	created	in	2001	as	 a	centre	of	excellence	for	study	of	the	 production,	acceleration	and	delivery	of	 charged	particle	beams.	
Research	and	experience	at	SRS	led	to	idea	for	Accelerator	Science	and	Technology	Centre(ASTeC)
Originally	based	at	the	Daresbury	Laboratory,	it	was	born	from	decades	of	advanced	particle	accelerator	research	and	development	at	the	Synchrotron	Radiation	Source	(SRS)	facility,	 which	was	closed	in	2008	after	twenty-eight	years	of	operation	and	2	million	hours	of	science135.
Accelerator Science andTechnology	Centre	(ASTeC)created	in	2001
ASTeC	now	carries	out	programmes	of	research	and	design	in	support	of	STFC’s	large-scale	multidisciplinary	facilities,	drawing	on	the	extensive	experience	of	accelerator	science	and	technology	staff	originally	employed	at	the	SRS.	SRS	and	ASTeC	users	and	staff	also	had	a	significant	impact	on	the	establishment	of	Diamond.	Many	worked	on	the	early	conception	and design as well as using skills and experience from	the	SRS	to	model	and	re-engineer	the	beamline components136. 
SRS	and	ASTeC	users	and	staff	contributed	to	the	early	conception	and	design	of	Diamond
Diamondopened	in	2007
153
[Page #157]
technology	development	requires	something	different.	In	other	cases	the	value	and	potential	of	an	infrastructure	increases	over	time,	e.g.	longitudinal	data	sets	or	physical	collections.
Funding	for	the	early-stage	investigation	of	new	infrastructures,	such	as	scoping	activity,	conceptual	design	and	feasibility	studies,	is	not always available. Our consultations over the	course	of	the	roadmap	programme	and	the	Landscape	Analysis	illustrated	the	challenges	faced	by	infrastructures	due	to	the	difference	in	their	expected	duration	and	the	frequency	of	funding	decision	points.	60%	of	infrastructures	in	our	analysis	have	an	expected	operational	lifetime	of	over	twenty-five	years	but	only	41%	felt	able	to	plan	one	to	three	years	ahead18.	Many	infrastructures	also	have	high	fixed-to-marginal-cost	ratios,	which	mean	small	budgetary	changes	have	an	amplified	impact.	Although	predictable	funding	cannot	be	guaranteed	for	the	full	lifecycle,	this	can	make	it	challenging	to	ensure	infrastructures	are	operating	optimally	and	supporting	long-term	operations	and	ongoing	technology	development.	
Although	the	duration	and	planning	cycle	of	an	infrastructure	will	vary	substantially	according	to	the	nature	of	its	work,	they	are	typically	operational	for	many	years	and	in	development	for	some	time	before	that.	Stable support and a long-term investment plan are vital to enable	the	full	benefits	to	be	realised	for	users,	potential	co-funders	and	the	wider	economy.	Many	infrastructures	operate	in	complex	funding	landscapes,	drawing	on	multiple	streams	of	varying	duration	over	the	course	of	their	lifecycle.	When	the	initial	capital	funding	to	set	up	an	infrastructure	is	provided,	the	source	of	the	ongoing	operational	funds,	including	staffing	costs,	may	need	to	be	drawn	from	elsewhere.	
CASE STUDY:  Investing to save: the RRS Sir David Attenborough
Research	in	the	Polar	Regions	is	fundamental	to	understanding	the	impact	of	polar	ice	melt	and	its	effect	on	climate	change.	NERC’s	two	existing	ice-strengthened	ships,	the	RRS	James Clark Ross and	the	RRS Ernest Shackleton,	provide	a	vital	platform	for	leading	edge	multi-discipline	science.	However,	at	the	time	the	business	case	was	put	together,	the	current	operating	costs	of	£50	million	a	year	were	expected	to	increase	over	the	next	five	years,	particularly	if	both	ships	were	extended	past	the	end	of	their	planned	lives	in	2019.
To	deliver	better	value	for	money,	NERC	is	investing	£966	million	over	thirty	years	for	a	single	polar	research	vessel,	the	RRS Sir David Attenborough. Replacing existing polar ships	with	a	state-of-the-art	new	vessel	will	reduce	fuel,	staffing	and	maintenance,	cutting	operating	costs	by	20%.	As	well	as	providing	an	advanced	research	capability,	this	timely	investment	is	estimated	to	save	£102	million	and	lead	to	the	generation	of	£2	billion	of	wider	economic	benefit	to	the	UK	through	securing	UK	international	leadership	in	polar	science.
ecyoR-s
ll
oR
154
[Page #158]
There	are	also	tensions	between	the	establishment	of	new	capability	against	maintaining and developing existing infrastructures	and	meeting	any	costs	associated	with	decommissioning.	The	UK	has	invested	in	significant	new	infrastructures	in	recent	years	alongside	many	well-established	capabilities.	This	is	an	important	part	of	the	pathway	to	increase	total	R&D	investment	to	2.4%	of	GDP.	All	of	these	infrastructures	have	long-term	operational	requirements,	although	no	infrastructure	can	expect	to	be	funded	indefinitely.	Ensuring	efficient	operation	and	adopting	new	technologies,	e.g.	automation,	can	help	manage	financial	pressures	but	require	investment	in	change	to	realise	benefits	later	down	the	line.	Tensioning	these	choices	is	a	critical	part	of	managing	any	infrastructure	portfolio	with	a	finite	budget	within	individual	institutions,	funding	organisations	or	more	broadly	across	the	UK.	UK	Research	and	Innovation	is	establishing a clear approach to managing its infrastructure portfolio	which	will	take	account	of	issues	of	sustainability	and	continue	to	ensure	value	for	public	investment.	This	will	draw	on	this	report	to	inform	the	decision-making	process.
This	process	for	deciding	on	infrastructure	investments needs to be underpinned by a clear cycle	of	monitoring,	review	and	performance	evaluation.	This	helps	us	understand	scientific	and	wider	impacts	ensure	quality	and	value	for	money,	and	supports	learning	to	inform	future	approaches137. 
Given	the	diversity	of	the	landscape,	there	is	no	single	approach	to	monitoring	or	evaluation	a	research	and	innovation	infrastructure.	Any	monitoring and evaluating processes need to	be	fit	for	purpose,	planned	early	in	the	lifecycle	and	scoped	to	support	the	particular	decisions	to	be	made.	Examples	of	good	practice	have	been	highlighted	by	the	European	Commission138,139,	including	guidance	on	useful	metrics	and	measures.	UK	Research	and	Innovation	impact	evaluations	are	undertaken	in	line	with	the	principles	set	out	in	the	government’s	overarching	appraisal,	evaluation	and	quality-assurance	frameworks140,141,142,143. Where	necessary,	UK	Research	and	Innovation	evaluations	also	consult	more	detailed	research	and	innovation	evaluation	guidance	using	the	BEIS	Science	Capital	Appraisal	Framework144. 
155
[Page #159]
Chapter 12: Next steps
Jon Bow from Pixabay
156
[Page #160]
This report provides an assessment of the future UK research and innovation infrastructure landscape. It summarises significant work and community engagement over the last eighteen months and builds on the Progress Report, reflecting the feedback received and further work to develop options for delivering the capability needs identified and ways forward on cross-cutting issues.
  Maintaining flexibility to respond to emerging 
This	report	is	intended	as	a	strategic guide to inform future investment decisions and identification of priorities	for	the	next-generation	of	infrastructure	to	2030.	In	the	context	of	the	goal	to	reach	2.4%	of	UK	GDP	invested	in	R&D	by	2027,	the	report	is	deliberately	ambitious	and	provides	an	overview	of	potential	infrastructure	opportunities	that	could	lead	to	a	step-change	in	the	capability	available	to	researchers	and	innovators	over	the	next	ten	years.	
priorities	and	new	financial	pressures
  Supporting	the	early-stage scoping and R&D	which	may	lead	to	development	of	new	infrastructure	capability	as	part	of	a	developing	portfolio
  Considering	the	potential	for	international 
collaboration and partnership
In	its	Strategic	Prospectus,	UK	Research	and	Innovation	committed	to	ensuring	energy efficiency and environmental sustainability in everything	we	do.	These	are	also	critical	factors	to	consider	in	future	decision-making	around	infrastructure	development	where,	for	example,	infrastructures	require	significant	power	supplies	or	have	the	potential	to	showcase	new	technologies	and	practices.	
Although	this	report	already	focused	on	areas	which	could	lead	to	a	step-change,	we	have	not	attempted	to	prioritise	across	the	capabilities	set	out	in	this	report.	Ultimately,	future	funding	to	develop	existing	infrastructures	or	create	new	capability	set	out	here	will	be	dependent	on	strategic investment decisions and availability of	funding	from	a	range	of	organisations	including	the	government	and	UK	Research	and	Innovation.	UK	Research	and	Innovation	is	establishing	a clear approach to managing its infrastructure portfolio to address issues of	sustainability	and	continue	to	ensure	value	for	public	investment.	We	will	use	this	report	to	inform	the	prioritisation	of	infrastructure	investments alongside additional work to explore costs	and	feasibility	of	projects	(Figure	21).	The	details	will	be	subject	to	the	outcome	of	future	spending	decisions	in	which	BEIS	will	be	making	the	case	to	HM	Treasury	for	funding	for	research	and	innovation,	taking	advice	from	UK	Research	and	Innovation	and	other	delivery	partners	including	the	academies	and	PSREs.	The	principles	below,	which	draw	on	international	good practice145,146,	will	be	important:	
Individual	Councils	within	UK	Research	and	Innovation	have	delegated	responsibility	to	manage	the	infrastructure	portfolio	within	their	domains	taking	advice	from	their	Councils,	but	many	investments	are	of	a	cost	that	cannot	be	accommodated	within	these	budgets,	cut	across	multiple	domains	or	are	of	a	scale	that	requires	approval	from	government.	BEIS	Ministers	will	guide	the	strategic	direction	of	this	process,	agreeing	major	strategic	priorities,	approving	spending decisions on major capital projects and	steering	the	balance	of	funding	between	UK	Research	and	Innovation	Councils.	The	above	principles are relevant in all cases. 
Our	intention	is	to	build	a	pipeline	of	ideas	and	infrastructure	requirements	for	the	longer	term,	and	ensure	the	underpinning	role	of	e-infrastructure	is	reflected	in	funding	structures	and	decisions.	As	set	out	in	Chapter	2	we	have	captured	ideas	at	different	stages	of	development,	from	those	which	require	further	scoping	to	those	where	the	requirement	and	implementation plan are clearer. Further work to define and scope ideas which are at earlier stages of development will	follow	in	anticipation	that	they	can	feed	into	the	portfolio	over	time.	
  A	continued	focus	on	excellence with impact 
alongside	consideration	of	the	strategic drivers, value for money and deliverability	of	any investments
  The	appropriate	independent advice and input 
as	a	vital	input	to	decision-making
  Decisions	to	fund	new	infrastructures	taking into account the full lifecycle costs including future	operation,	staffing		and	any	future	decommissioning	costs	whether	there	is	enough	demand,	strong	governance	and	incentives	to	ensure	efficient	and	effective	use
157
[Page #161]
This	report	is	a	‘living	document’	which	can	be	updated	as	new	ideas	arise	and	others	become	a lower priority. We will keep the report under review with a regular, more substantial refresh every few years	in	consultation	with	the	research	and innovation community. 
As	this	is	the	first	exercise	of	this	scale	undertaken	in	the	UK,	there	are	many	lessons	learned	we	can	build	into	future	iterations.	For	example,	future	editions	could	include	greater	consideration	of	the	infrastructure	landscape	outside	of	the	public	sector,	explore	opportunities	to	create	links	across	the	landscape	in	more	depth	and	forge	stronger	links	across	sectors	particularly	in	the	area	of	data science. 
Analysis of theresearch andinnovation infrastructurelandscape, future needs andopportunities
Operation,monitoring and evaluation. Reviewand refresh
Define strategicthemes andinfrastructureopportunities
This report
INFRASTRUCTUREPLANNING
Prioritise infrastructureinvestments within and across strategic themes
Planning,preparation andconstruction
Developdetailedbusiness cases
Figure	21.	Overview	of	infrastructure	planning	process.
158
[Page #162]
AcknowledgementsThis	report	has	been	prepared	by	UK	Research	and	Innovation	with	support	and	advice	from	the	following	organisations:	Met	Office,	National	Physical	Laboratory	(NPL),	UK	Atomic	Energy	Authority	(UKAEA),	UK	Space	Agency	(UKSA),	National	Nuclear	Laboratory	(NNL),	Department	for	Business,	Energy	and	Industrial	Strategy	(BEIS),	Higher	Education	Funding	Council	for	Wales	(HEFCW),	Scottish	Funding	Council	(SFC),	Department	for	the	Economy	of	Northern	Ireland	(DfE	NI),	Royal	Society,	Universities	UK	and	Association	for	Innovation,	Research	and	Technology	Organisations	(AIRTO).	
We	are	very	grateful	for	the	significant	engagement	of	over	900	infrastructures,	universities	and	other	organisations	who	responded	to	the	landscape	questionnaires	and	the	many	stakeholders	who	participated	in	one	or	more	of	the	dedicated	workshops	and	meetings	or	provided	advice	through	UK	Research	and	Innovation’s	advisory	networks,	including	its	Councils	and	strategic	boards	and	committees.	We	are	also	grateful	for	insights	from	colleagues	responsible	for	the	development	of	roadmaps	in	other	countries	and	from	European	Strategy	Forum	on	Research	Infrastructures	(ESFRI)	and	to	international	representatives	who	participated	in	a	workshop	at	the	2019	Annual	Meeting	of	the	American	Association	for	the	Advancement	of	Science	(AAAS).
159
[Page #163]
Acronyms and abbreviations
2D	
Two-Dimensional
DSTL	
Defence	Science	and	Technology	Laboratory
3D	
Three-Dimensional	
EBI	
European	Bioinformatics	Institute
AAAI	
Authentication,	Authorisation	and	Accounting	Infrastructure
ELI	
Extreme	Light	Infrastructure
AAAS	
American	Association	for	the	Advancement	of	Science
ELIXIR	
European	Life	Science	Infrastructure	 for	Biological	Information
ADR	UK	
Administrative	Data	Research	UK	(previously	ADRP)	
EMBL	
European	Molecular	Biology	Laboratory
EMBL-EBI	
European	Molecular	Biology	Laboratory	-	European	Bioinformatics	Institute
ADS	
Archaeological	Data	Service
Agri-EPI	
Agricultural	Engineering,	Precision	 and	Innovation	Centre
EMEC	
European	Marine	Energy	Centre
EMPHASIS	 European	Infrastructure	for	Multi-scale	
AHRC	
Arts	and	Humanities	Research	Council
Plant	Phenomics	and	Simulation
AI	
Artificial	Intelligence
EPAC	
Extreme	Photonics	Application	Centre
AIRTO	
Association	of	Innovation,	Research	 and	Technology	Organisations
EPSRC	
Engineering	and	Physical	Sciences	Research	Council
ALICE	
Accelerators	and	Lasers	In	Combined	Experiments
E-RIHS	
European	Research	Infrastructure	for	Heritage	Science
ALICE	-		
A	Large	Ion	Collider	Experiment
ESA 
European Space Agency
AMR		
Advanced	modular	reactor	
ESFRI	
European	Strategy	Forum	on	Research	Infrastructures
AMR	
Antimicrobial	Resistance
ESRC	
Economic	and	Social	Research	Council
ARTFUL	
Advanced	infrared/Terahertz	Facilities	for	Users	of	Lasers
ESRF	
European	Synchrotron	Radiation	Facility
ASTeC	
Accelerator	Science	and	Technology	Centre
ESS 
European Spallation Source
EU	
European	Union	
ATLAS	
A	Toroidal	LHC	Apparatus	
Euro-	Bioimaging		
European	Research	Infrastructure	forImaging	Technologies	in	Biological	and	Biomedical	Sciences
AWE	
Atomic	Weapons	Establishment
BBC	
British	Broadcasting	Corporation
EuroMod	
Tax-benefit	microsimulation	model	 for	the	European	Union
BBSRC	
Biotechnology	and	Biological	Sciences	Research	Council
European	XFEL	
European	X-ray	Free-Electron	LaserFacility
BEIS	
Department	for	Business,	Energy	and	Industrial	Strategy
FAAM	
Facility	for	Airborne	Atmospheric	Measurements
BSL-3	
Biosafety	Level	3
CAT3	
Category	3
FAANG	
Functional	Annotation	of	Animal	Genomes
CCS	
Carbon	Capture	and	Storage
CERN	
Conseil	Européen	pour	la	Recherché	Nucléaire	(European	Organisation	for	Nuclear	Research)
FAIR	
Findable,	Accessible,	Interoperable,	Reusable
FEL	
Free	Electron	Laser
CHAP	
Crop	Health	and	Protection
FELIX	
Free	Electron	Lasers	for	Infrared	eXperiments
CHP		
Combined	heat	and	power	
CLF	
Central	Laser	Facility
G7	
Group	of	Seven	(Canada,	France,	Germany,	Italy,	Japan,	the	UK	and	the	USA)
CMS	CO2	Cryo-EM	
Compact	Muon	Solenoid
Carbon	Dioxide
GDP	
Gross	Domestic	Product	
Cryo-Electron	Microscopy
GLAM	
Galleries,	Libraries,	Archives	and	Museums
CT	
Computed	Tomography
CUBRIC	
Cardiff	University	Brain	Research	Imaging	Centre
GVA	
Gross	Value	Added
GW	
Gravitational	Wave
DAFNI	
Data	and	Analytics	Facility	for	National	Infrastructure
HDR-UK	
Health	Data	Research-UK	
DCMS	
Department	of	Culture,	Media	and	Sport
HEaTED	
Higher	Education	and	Technician’s	Educational Development
Defra	
Department	for	Environment	Food	and	Rural	Affairs
HEI	
Higher	Education	Institution
Diamond	
Diamond	Light	Source
HE-LHC	
Higher-Energy	Large	Hadron	Collider
DiPOLE	
Diode	Pumped	Optical	Laser	for	Experiments  
HiLUX	
Ultrafast	Structure	and	Dynamics	 at	RCaH
DiRAC	
Distributed	Research	utilising	 Advanced	Computing
HIV	
Human	Immunodeficiency	Virus
160
[Page #164]
PV	
Photovoltaic
HL-LHC	
High-Luminosity	Large	Hadron	Collider
PWR  
Pressurised water reactor 
HPC	
High-Performance	Computing
R&D	
Research	and	Development
HTC	
High-Throughput	Computing
RACE	
Remote	Applications	in	Challenging	Environment
IBD	
Inflammatory	Bowel	Disease
ICR	
Institute	of	Cancer	Research
RAL	
Rutherford	Appleton	Laboratory
ICT	
Information	and	Communications	Technology
RCaH	
Research	Complex	at	Harwell
RIKEN	
Rikagaku	Kenkyūjo	(Japanese	Research	and	Development	Institute)
IIIF	
International	ImageInteroperability	Framework
RRS	
Royal	Research	Ship
ILL	
Institute	Laue-Langevin
RUEDI		
Relativistic	Ultrafast	Electron	Diffraction	and	Imaging	
Instruct-	ERIC		
Integrated	Structural	Biology	–	European	Research	Infrastructure	Consortium
SAMS	
Scottish	Association	for	Marine	Science
InTEGReL	
Integrated	Transport	Electricity	Gas	Research	Laboratory
SBUK	
Synthetic	Biology	UK
ISCF	
Industrial	Strategy	Challenge	Fund
SKA	
Square	Kilometre	Array
ISIS	
ISIS	Neutron	and	Muon	Source
SME	
Small	and	Medium	sized	Enterprises
JASMIN	
Joint	Analysis	System	Meeting	Infrastructure	Needs
SMR		
Small	modular	reactor	
SMR	
Steam	Methane	Reforming
JET	
Joint	European	Torus
SNS	
Spallation	Neutron	Source
LEAPS	
League	of	European	Accelerator-based	Photon	Sources
SRS	
Synchrotron	Radiation	Source
STAR-IDAZ	
International	Research	Consortium	 on	Animal	Health
LHC		
Large	Hadron	Collider
LHCb	
Large	Hadron	Collider	beauty	experiment 
STEP	
Spherical	Tokamak	for	Energy	Production
LIDAR	
Light	Detection	and	Ranging
STFC	
Science	and	Technology	Facilities	Council
MAST	
Mega	Amp	Spherical	Tokamak
MONSooN	 Met	Office/NERC	Superco(o)mputer	
SUPERGEN	 Sustainable	Power	Generation	and	
Nodes
Supply initiative
MR	Linac	
Magnetic	Resonance	Linear	Accelerator
TfL	
Transport	for	London
TRL	
Technology	Readiness	Level
MRC	
Medical	Research	Council
TROPOMI	
Tropospheric	Monitoring	Instrument
MRI	
Magnetic	Resonance	Imaging
UAV	
Unmanned	Aerial	Vehicle
MW	
Megawatt	
UCL	
University	College	London
NAMRC	
Nuclear	Advanced	Manufacturing	Research	Centre
UKCRIC	
UK	Collaboratorium	for	Research	 on	Infrastructures	and	Cities
NASA	
National	Aeronautics	and	Space	Administration
UKDS	
UK	Data	Service
UKGEOS	
UK	Geoenergy	Observatories
NERC	
Natural	Environment	Research	Council
UKRI	
UK	Research	and	Innovation	
NHS	
National	Health	Service
UK-RIHS	
UK	Research	Infrastructure	for	 Heritage	Science
NiCoLA-B	
AstraZeneca’s	drug	discovery	robotics	platform
UKSA	
UK	Space	Agency
NIHR	
National	Institute	for	Health	Research
UN	
United	Nations
NMR	
Nuclear	Magnetic	Resonance
UUV	
Unmanned	Underwater	Vehicle
NNL	
National	Nuclear	Laboratory
V&A	
Victoria	and	Albert	Museum
NOC	
National	Oceanography	Centre
WHO	
World	Health	Organisation
NPL	
National	Physical	Laboratory
XAFS	
X-ray	Absorption	Fine	Structure
NRF	
National	Research	Facility	
XFEL	
X-ray	Free	Electron	Laser
OECD	
Organisation	for	Economic	Co-operation and Development
ORE	
Offshore	Renewable	Energy
PET	
Positron	Emission	Tomography
PRACE	
Partnership	for	Advanced	Computing	 in Europe
PSREs	
Public	Sector	Research	Establishments
161
[Page #165]
References
1	
Department	for	Business,	Energy	&	Industrial	Strategy,	International	comparative	performance	of	the	UK	
research	base,	2019	(website	accessed	July	2019)
2	
Institute	for	Scientific	Information,	The	Annual	G20	Scorecard	–	Research	Performance	2019,	2019	
(website	accessed	July	2019)	
3	
Economic	Insight,	What	is	the	relationship	between	public	and	private	investment	in	science,	research	and	
innovation?,	2015	(website	accessed	April	2019)
4	
Estimate	from	UK	Research	and	Innovation	economic	models	(unpublished)
5	
McKinsey	Global	Institute,	Global	Growth:	Can	Productivity	Save	the	Day	in	an	Aging	World?,	2015
6	
Beagrie,	C,	The	Value	and	Impact	of	the	European	Bioinformatics	Institute,	2016	 
(website	accessed	May	2019)
7	
Cambridge	Policy	Consultants,	Socio-economic	impact	of	EPSRC’s	investment	in	research	equipment,	
2018	(website	accessed	April	2019)
8	
Technopolis	Group,	ISIS	Lifetime	Impact	Study,	Volume	1:	Full	Report,	2016
9	
National	Audit	Office,	BIS’s	capital	investment	in	science	projects,	2016	(website	accessed	May	2019)	
10	
Department	for	Business,	Energy	and	Industrial	Strategy,	Industrial	Strategy:	building	a	Britain	fit	for	the	
future,	2017	(website	accessed	April	2019)
11	
Royal	Society,	Dynamics	of	data	science	skills	-	How	can	all	sectors	benefit	from	data	science	talent?,	2019 
(website	accessed	June	2019)
12	
TechHQ,	Investment	in	UK	artificial	intelligence	startups	soars,	2019
13	
UK	Research	and	Innovation,	Pathways	to	2.4%:	evidence	and	analysis	to	inform	the	development	of	the	
Government	roadmap,	2019
14	
Ministry	of	Defence,	Global	Strategic	Trends	The	Future	Starts	Today	(6th	Edition),	2018	 
(website	accessed	May	2019)	
15	
Elsevier,	Performance	of	the	UK	research	base:	international	comparison,	2016,	2016
16	
Cornell	University,	INSEAD,	and	the	World	Intellectual	Property	Organization,	Global	Innovation	Index	(GII)	
2019:	Creating	Healthy	Lives-The	Future	of	Medical	Innovation,	2019	(website	accessed	July	2019)
17	
Eurostat	Statistics	Explained,	R&D	expenditure (data	extracted	2018).
18 
UK	Research	and	Innovation	Infrastructure	Roadmap	Programme,	Landscape	Analysis,	2019 
19	
Main	Science	and	Technology	Indicators,	OECD	MSTI	database	(data	extracted	4	November	2018).
20	
Xinhua,	China	issues	S&T	development	guidelines,	2016	(website	accessed	April	2019)
21	
Eurostat	Statistics	Explained,	Archive:	Europe	2020	indicators	–	research	and	development,	2016	 
(website	accessed	April	2019)
22	
Science	Mag,	Trump,	Congress	approve	largest	U.S.	research	spending	increase	in	a	decade,	2018	 
(website	accessed	April	2019)
23	
European	Strategy	Forum	on	Research	Infrastructures,	The	National	Roadmaps,	2019	(website	accessed	
April	2019)
24	
Research	Councils	UK,	RCUK	Strategic	Framework	for	Capital	Investment,	2012	(website	accessed	 
April	2019)
25	
Department	for	Business,	Energy	and	Industrial	Strategy,	Research	and	Innovation	Organisations	in	the	UK,	
2015	(website	accessed	April	2019)
26	
Research	Councils	UK,	Large	Facilities	2010,	2010	(website	accessed	April	2019)				
27	
Royal	Society,	A	snapshot	of	UK	research	infrastructures,	2018	(website	accessed	April	2019)
28	
Department	for	Business,	Energy	and	Industrial	Strategy,	BIS	science	capital	roadmap,	2014	 
(website	accessed	April	2019)
29	
European	Strategy	Forum	on	Research	Infrastructures,	ESFRI	Roadmap,	2018	(website	accessed	 
April	2019)
30	
House	of	Lords,	House	of	Lords	Science	and	Technology	Committee	inquiry	on	Scientific	Infrastructure,	
2014	(website	accessed	April	2019)
31	
European	Commission,	About	Research	Infrastructures	(website	accessed	Nov	2018)
32	
UK	Research	and	Innovation	Infrastructure	Roadmap	Programme,	Initial	analysis	of	infrastructure	
questionnaire	responses	and	description	of	the	landscape,	2018	(website	accessed	April	2019)
33	
UK	Research	and	Innovation,	UK	Research	and	Innovation	Delivery	Plans	2019	(website	accessed	 
April	2019)	
162
[Page #166]
34	
UK	Research	and	Innovation	Infrastructure	Roadmap	Programme,	Progress Report,	2019	 
(website	accessed	April	2019)
35 
Office	for	Life	Sciences,	Bioscience	and	Health	Technology	Sector	Statistics	2018,	2019	
36	
Office	for	Life	Sciences,	Life	sciences:	industrial	strategy,	2017	(website	accessed	May	2019)	
37	
Department	for	Business,	Energy	&	Industrial	Strategy,	Bioeconomy	strategy:	2018	–	2030,	2018	 
(website	accessed	May	2019)	
38	
Department	for	Business,	Energy	&	Industrial	Strategy,	The	Clean	Growth	Strategy:	Leading	the	way	to	a	
low	carbon	future,	2017	(website	accessed	May	2019)	
39	
Animal	and	Plant	Health	Agency,	APHA	Science	Strategy	2015-2020,	2015
40	
Medical	Research	Council,	Maximising	the	value	of	UK	population	cohorts:	MRC	Strategic	Review	of	the	
Largest	UK	Population	Cohort	Studies,	2014
41	
Biotechnology	and	Biological	Sciences	Research	Council,	Research	in	Agriculture	and	Food	Security,	
Strategic Framework,	2017
42	
Biotechnology	and	Biological	Sciences	Research	Council,	Economic	and	Social	Research	Council	and	
Medical	Research	Council,	A	Cross-Council	vision	for	Food,	Nutrition	and	Health	research,	2015	
HM	Government,	A	UK	Strategy	for	Agricultural	Technologies,	2013	(website	accessed	May	2019)
43	
Designing	Future	Wheat,	Homepage,	2019	(website	accessed	April	2019) 
44	
Department	for	Business,	Energy	&	Industrial	Strategy,	The	Clean	Growth	Strategy:	Leading	the	way	to	a	
45	
low	carbon	future,	2017	(website	accessed	May	2019)	
46	
Wilkinson,	M.	D	et	al.,	The	FAIR	Guiding	Principles	for	scientific	data	management	and	stewardship,	2016	
(website	accessed	May	2019)	
47	
Department	for	Business,	Energy	&	Industrial	Strategy,	Introduction	to	Sector	Deals,	2018	 
(website	accessed	May	2019)
48	
Payne,	D,	Roadmap	for	Photoelectron	Spectroscopy,	Engineering	and	Physical	Sciences	Research	Council,	
2017
49	
Department	for	Business,	Energy	and	Industrial	Strategy,	Made	Smarter	Review,	2017
50	
UK	National	Quantum	Technologies	Programme,	A	roadmap	for	quantum	technologies	in	the	UK,	2015	
51	
Government	Office	for	Science,	The	Quantum	Age:	technological	opportunities.	Blackett	Review,	2016	
52	
Science	and	Technology	Facilities	Council,	Breast	cancer	detection	research	receives	STFC	funding,	2018
53	
Engineering	and	Physical	Sciences	Research	Council,	Roadmap:	Provision	of	Internationally	Leading	Wind	
Tunnel	Infrastructure,	2015
54	
Bolton,	A	et	al.,	The	Gemini	Principles,	2018
55	
Government	Office	for	Science	and	Cabinet	Office,	Areas	of	Research	Interest,	2017
56	
UK	Research	and	Innovation,	Eligibility	for	Research	Council	Funding,	2016	
57	
UK	Data	Forum,	UK	Strategy	for	Data	Resources	for	Social	and	Economic	Research	2013	–	2018
58	
Administrative	Data	Taskforce,	The	UK	Administrative	Data	Research	Network:	Improving	Access	for	
Research	and	Policy,	2012	
59	
Economic	and	Social	Research	Council,	Longitudinal	Studies	Review	2017,	2018
60	
Welsh	Government,	Nest:	Helping	you	make	your	home	warmer	and	more	energy	efficient	(website	
accessed	March	2019)
61	
Welsh	Government,	The	Fuel	Poverty	Data	Linking	Project	Findings	Report	No.	1:	Initial	Findings	on	the	
Impact	on	Health	of	the	Warm	Homes	Nest	Scheme,	2017	(website	accessed	March	2019)
62	
Jefferies,	B.J.,	Power,	C	and	Manor,	O,	Alcohol	consumption	in	two	British	Birth	cohorts:	from	adolescence	
to	adulthood.	A	report	to	the	Strategy	Unit	(Cabinet	Office),	2002
63	
HM	Government,	The	Government’s	Alcohol	Strategy,	2012	(website	accessed	June	2019)
64	
National	Institute	for	Health	and	Care	Excellence,	Alcohol-use	disorders:	prevention	–	Public	health	
guideline	[PH24],	2010
65	
Department	for	Children,	Schools	and	Families,	Draft	Guidance	on	the	Consumption	of	Alcohol	by		Children	
and	Young	People	from	the	Chief	Medical	Officers	of	England,	Wales	and	Northern	Ireland,	2009	 
(website	accessed	June	2019)
66	
The	Fitzwilliam	Museum,	Nespawershefyt’s	coffin	set	(website	accessed	May	2019)
67	
Department	for	Business,	Energy	&	Industrial	Strategy,	Creative	Industries	Sector	Deal,	2019
68	
Design	Council,	The	Design	Economy:	The	value	of	design	to	the	UK	(website	accessed	May	2019)	
163
[Page #167]
69	
PWC,	UK	entertainment	and	media	sector	to	be	worth	£72bn	by	2021,	according	to	new	PwC	report,	2017 
(website	accessed	May	2019)	
70	
Historic	England,	Heritage	and	the	Economy	2018,	2018
71	
Department	for	Culture,	Media	&	Sport,	Trends	Business	Research	Ltd,	NEF	Consulting	Ltd	and	Middlesex	
University,	The	role	of	culture,	sport	and	heritage	in	place	shaping,	2017	
72	
Age	UK,	Creative	and	Cultural	Activities	and	Wellbeing	in	Later	Life,	2018	(website	accessed	May	2019)
73	
Facer,	K	and	Enright,	B,	Creating	Living	Knowledge:	The	Connected	Communities	Programme,	community	
university	relationships	and	the	participatory	turn	in	the	production	of	knowledge,	2016,	Bristol:	University	
of	Bristol/AHRC	Connected	Communities	(website	accessed	May	2019)
74	
National	Heritage	Science	Forum,	Strategic	Framework	for	Heritage	Science	in	the	UK	2018	-	2023,	2018	
(website	accessed	May	2019)	
75	
Europeana,	Homepage (website	accessed	June	2019)
76	
Department	for	Business,	Energy	&	Industrial	Strategy,	Offshore	wind	Sector	Deal,	2019	
77	
HM	Government,	Nuclear	Sector	Deal,	2018	
78	
Ricardo	Energy	and	Environment	for	the	Committee	on	Climate	Change,	UK	business	opportunities	of	
moving to a low carbon economy,	2017
79	
The	Energy	Innovation	Board,	2019	Energy	Innovation	Needs	Assessments.	[expected	publication	date	
2019]
80	
Mission	Innovation,	Homepage	(website	accessed	May	2019)	
81	
Department	for	Business,	Energy	and	Industrial	Strategy,	Clean	Growth:	Transforming	Heating,	2018
82	
Energy	Systems	Catapult,	Local	Area	Energy	Planning:	Insights	from	three	pilot	local	areas,	Executive	
summary,	2018
83	
Energy	Systems	Catapult,	Local	Area	Energy	Planning:	key	to	minimising	decarbonisation	costs,	2018
84	
Newcastle	University,	Integrel	Briefing	Note (website	accessed	June	2019)
85	
The	European	Marine	Energy	Centre,	Pathway	to	commercialisation	-	An	EMEC	guide	to	research,	
development	and	testing	of	marine	energy	technology,	2019
86	
Nuclear	Innovation	and	Research	Advisory	Board,	NIRAB	Annual	Report	2018/19:	Clean	Growth	through	
Innovation	–	the	need	for	urgent	action,	2019
87	
Orion	Innovations	(UK)	Ltd,	A	UK	Vision	for	Carbon	Capture	and	Storage,	2013	(website	accessed	 
May	2019)	
88	
International	Energy	Agency,	Carbon	Capture	and	Storage:	Progress	and	Next	Steps,	2010	(website	
accessed	May	2019)	
89	
Simon	Hettrick,	It’s	Impossible	to	conduct	research	without	software,	say	7	out	of	10	UK	researchers,	
Software	Sustainability	Institute,	2014
90	
Simon	Hettrick,	£840	million:	the	UK’s	investment	in	software-reliant	research	in	2013,	Software	
Sustainability	Institute,	2014
91	
Hamilton,	M	et	al,	UK	National	E-Infrastructure	Survey	2015	Report,	High	Performance	Computing	–	
Special	Interest	Group,	2015
92	
Government	Office	for	Science,	Council	for	Science	and	Technology,	Computational	modelling:	
Technological	Futures,	2018
93	
Technopolis,	Hartree	Centre	Phase	1&2	Baseline	Evaluation:	Final	Report,	2018
94	
Professor	Dame	Wendy	Hall	and	Jérôme	Pesenti,	Growing	the	artificial	intelligence	industry	in	the	UK 
(website	accessed	May	2019)	
95	
Engineering	and	Physical	Sciences	Research	Council,	EPSRC	strategy	for	the	developing	landscape	of	Tier-
2	HPC	in	the	UK	(website	accessed	May	2019)	
96	
Partnership	for	Advanced	Computing	in	Europe,	The	Scientific	Case	for	High	Performance	Computing	in	
Europe	2012	–	2020:	From	Petascale	to	Exascale,	2012	(website	accessed	May	2019)
Physics,	Synopsis:	Peering	into	a	Molecular	Magnet,	2017
97	
Engineering	and	Physical	Sciences	Research	Council,	National	Research	Facilities	(website	accessed	 
98	
Nov	2018)
99	
UK	National	Crystallography	Service,	Homepage	(website	accessed	Nov	2018)
100	
Department	for	Business,	Energy	&	Industrial	Strategy,	International	Research	and	Innovation	Strategy,	
2019	(website	accessed	May	2019)	
164
[Page #168]
101	
University	of	Nottingham,	Sir	Peter	Mansfield	Imaging	Centre,	The	UK7T	Network:	developing	the	ultra-high	
field	MRI	platform	for	biomedical	research	(website	accessed	June	2019)
102	
Department	for	Business,	Energy	and	Industrial	Strategy,	Science	and	Innovation	Audits	(website	accessed	
April	2019)
103	
Department	for	Business,	Innovation	and	Skills,	Business-university	collaboration:	the	Wilson	review,	2012	
(website	accessed	May	2019)	
104	
Department	for	Business,	Innovation	and	Skills,	Encouraging	a	British	invention	revolution:	Sir	Andrew	
Witty’s	review	of	universities	and	growth:	final	report	and	recommendations,	2013	(website	accessed	May	
2019)	
105	
UK	Research	and	Innovation,	Strength	in	Places	Fund	(website	accessed	April	2019)
106	
Belmana	and	Centre	for	Enterprise	and	Economic	Development	Research,	Middlesex	University,	Interim	
Evaluation	of	the	UK	Research	Partnership	Investment	Fund,	2018	(website	accessed	May	2019)
107	 Medical	Research	Council,	Clinical	Research	Capabilities	and	Technologies	Initiative (website	accessed	
May	2019)
108	
Universities	UK,	Efficiency,	effectiveness	and	value	for	money,	2015	(website	accessed	May	2019)
109	
BioImagingUK,	Homepage	(website	accessed	May	2019)
110	
League	of	European	Accelerator-based	Photon	Sources,	Homepage (website	accessed	May	2019)
111	
Science	&	Technologies	Facilities	Council,	Bridging	for	Innovators	(B4I)	funding (website	accessed	 
May	2019)
112	
Equipment	Data,	About	this	site	(website	accessed	May	2019)	
113	
Konfer,	Homepage	(website	accessed	May	2019)	
114	
Royal	Academy	of	Engineering,	Late-stage	development	and	demonstrators	(website	accessed	April	2019)
115	
Armstrong,	H	and	Rae,	J,	A	working	model	for	anticipatory	regulation,	2017	(website	accessed	May	2019)
116	
Browning,	N	and	Hardwick,	L,	Identifying	Infrastructure	and	Collaborative	Expertise	for	Electrochemical	
Energy Storage Applications,	University	of	Liverpool,	2018	(website	accessed	April	2019)
117	
Knowledge	Transfer	Network,	UK-Wide	Capability	Mapping	of	Industrial	Digitalisation	Technologies	(IDTs),	
2019	(website	accessed	April	2019)
118 
Analysis	by	UK	Research	and	Innovation	using	The	Organisation	for	Economic	Co-operation	and	
Development data,	2018	(website	accessed	April	2019)
119	
Department	for	Education	and	Higher	Education	Statistics	Agency,	Higher	Education	Staff:	2017	to	2018	
academic year,	2019	(website	accessed	April	2019)
120	
The	Gatsby	Charitable	Foundation,	Raising	the	profile	of	technicians	(website	accessed	April	2019)
121	
Russell	Group,	Impact	of	Brexit	on	the	Technical	Workforce,	2017	(website	accessed	April	2019)
122	
European	Commission,	Report	on	the	Consultation	on	Long	Term	Sustainability	of	Research	
Infrastructures,	2016	(website	accessed	April	2019)
123	
Biotechnology	and	Biological	Sciences	Research	Council,	Non-faculty	Researchers	Survey,	2015	
(unpublished)
124	
Ball,	M.,	Hardwick,	R	and	Vere,	K,	Forge	a	clearer	path	for	technical	careers,	2016	(website	accessed	 
April	2019)
125	
Technicians,	Homepage	(website	accessed	May	2019)
126	
Technical	Development	&	Modernisation,	About	the	TDM	Toolkit (website	accessed	May	2019)
127	
Higher	Education	and	Technician’s	Educational	Development	(HEaTED),	Homepage (website	accessed	 
May	2019)
128	
UK	Research	and	Innovation,	RCUK	Statement	of	expectations	for	technology	/	skills	specialists (website	
accessed	May	2019)
129	
University	of	Bristol,	Career	Framework	for	Technical	Staff,	2017	(website	accessed	April	2019)
130	
Open	Data	Institute,	Data	trusts:	lessons	from	three	pilots,	2019	(website	accessed	April	2019)
131	 Wilkinson,	M	et	al.,	The	FAIR	Principles	for	scientific	data	management	and	stewardship,	Nature,	2016
132	
UK	Research	and	Innovation,	Common	principles	on	data	policy	(website	accessed	May	2019)
133	
Higher	Education	Funding	Council	for	England,	Research	Councils	UK,	Universities	UK	and	Wellcome,	
Concordat	on	Open	Resarch	Data,	2016	(website	accessed	May	2019)
134	
Archaeology	Data	Service,	Homepage (website	accessed	May	2019)
165
[Page #169]
135	
Synchrotron	Radiation	Source,	After	two	million	hours	of	science	a	British	world	first	bids	farewell	 
(website	accessed	May	2019)
136	
Science	&	Technology	Facilities	Council,	New	Light	on	Science	The	Social	&	Economic	Impact	of	the	
Daresbury	Synchrotron	Radiation	Source,	(1981	-	2008),	2008
137	
Organisation	for	Economic	Co-operation	and	Development,	Reference	framework	for	assessing	the	
scientific	and	socio-economic	impact	of	research	infrastructures,	2019	(website	accessed	April	2019)
138	
European	Commission,	FenRIAM:	Proposal	for	a	foresight-enriched	Research	infrastructure	Impact	
Assessment	Methodology,	2011	(website	accessed	April	2019)
139	
European	Commission,	Interim	Evaluation	of	the	European	Research	Infrastructures	including	
e-Infrastructures	in	Horizon	2020,	2017	(website	accessed	April	2019)
140	
Department	for	Business,	Energy	and	Industrial	Strategy,	Evaluation	Plan	2016	(Annual	Update	to	Annex	A	
in	the	Evaluation	Strategy),	2016	(website	accessed	April	2019)
141	
HM	Treasury,	The	Green	Book:	central	government	guidance	on	appraisal	and	evaluation,	2018	 
(website	accessed	April	2019)
142	
HM	Treasury,	The	Magenta	Book:	central	government	guidance	for	evaluation,	2011	(website	accessed	
April	2019)
143	
HM	Treasury,	The	Aqua	Book:	guidance	on	producing	quality	analysis	for	government,	2015	 
(website	accessed	April	2019)
144	
Department	for	Business,	Energy	and	Industrial	Strategy	guidance	[internal	only]	
145	
Technopolis	Group,	International	Comparative	Study:	Appraisal	and	Evaluation	Practices	of	Science	Capital	
Spending	on	Research	Infrastructures,	2017	(website	accessed	April	2019)
146	
European	Strategy	Forum	on	Research	Infrastructures,	Public	Roadmap	2018	Guide,	2016	 
(website	accessed	April	2019)
166
[Page #170]
None
[Page #171]
None
