[Page #0]
A blueprint
for green workforce transformation
[Page #1]
Contents
Foreword 
03
Definitions and research methodology 
05
Introduction 
07
Current state 
09
Unlocking the future  
20
Unlocking the future: regional and national initiatives   44
Endnotes  
50
Contacts  
54
02
[Page #2]
FOREWORD
The world faces a serious
environmental crisis.
This crisis is more than just global warming. Declining biodiversity and a pressing need to reduce wastage in all aspects of our economy are equally threatening to human life on our planet.
03
[Page #3]
FOREWORD
In response to the need for global action, the UK government has set out a plan to transform the UK economy so that it achieves net zero by 2050.
The plan calls for significant evolution of foundational parts of our industrial economy, entailing decarbonising the electricity grid and installing new national infrastructure to create and distribute future fuels such as hydrogen, biofuels and e-fuels. Essential sectors, such as food production, will experience system-wide changes right the way through from agricultural practices and land use to distribution, retail and consumption.
We know that eighty per cent of individuals who will be in the workforce in 2030 are already working today which means that now is the time to act to build their capabilities for the future. 
Our recommendations seek to accelerate your organisation’s transition to the ‘green’ future. The report contains:
  case studies drawn from a wide range of organisations, showing how they have begun to adopt environmental sustainability into strategies and ways of working. 
• 
We hope you find our research useful and look forward to your feedback.
• 
  an assessment of key blockers and corresponding enablers related to strategically embedding green skills and behaviours across an organisation. Each is mapped by organisational maturity and supported with case studies from featured organisations.
Organisations of all sizes will play a part in contributing to the UK government commitments to mitigate and repair environmental damage. Doing so while remaining economically viable will require different ways of operating, placing new demands on workers at all levels. Our research paints a picture of an accelerating drive to build this greener workforce across the UK economy. In preparing this report we have developed a set of insights intended to help organisations design their strategic green workforce transformation.
Matthew Guest, Partner
• 
  key regional and national initiatives that stakeholders believe can assist workforce transformation in communities across the UK.
Daniel Grosvenor, Partner 
In addition, we have built a standalone toolkit for leaders to mobilise a green skills workforce transformation within organisations. It contains a maturity matrix to identify gaps and possible options to create change. 
Sarah Mukherjee, CEO, IEMA 
04
[Page #4]
Definitions and
research methodology
05
[Page #5]
DEFINITIONS AND RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
wide range of sectors such as energy, construction, retail, transport and health.  
Green economy
DefinitionsAs the UK transitions to a green economy, our understanding of what it means to be ‘green’ will undoubtedly evolve. The following are our working definitions and assumptions.
Research methodologyIn November 2021 the Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment (IEMA) andDeloitte engaged with public and private sector organisations to explore the barriers experienced in and potential enablers for the transition to green skills in the UK.
A potential future state of the whole UK economy in which fundamental change in the way the economy functions, not unlike the first industrial revolution has taken place. Growth will continue to be the essential motif of our economy but its measurement will be more holistic, more consistently factoring in people and planet alongside profit. For example, we will quantify and value biodiversity as we quantify and value domestic production.
Deloitte also undertook analysis of LinkedIn and UK Office for National Statistics (ONS) data to examine trends in green skills uptake and green jobs demand in the UK market.
LinkedIn data
Deloitte was granted access to LinkedIn Talent Pool Insights to analyse UK green jobs and green skills talent pools in 2020 to 2021 (the data analysed covered the year to November 2021). These talent pools were created by selecting keyword filters based on job titles and professional skills. The talent pools generated showed a number of trends across job roles, employers, industries, skills and location, as well as other variables. These insights have been represented in tables and graph in the report. 
A series of predictions taken from our Futures We Want report1 illustrates what a green economy in 2050 might be like. A world in which carbon emissions are captured and reused, where renewable energy is stored and used when its needed and where the UK’s homes have moved to low carbon heating. Precise AI-driven farming and robotic weeding will produce more from less land, insects are a mainstream dietary protein source and food ‘waste’ is transformed into valuable medicine. There will be low energy city travel, from shared technology like driverless electric taxis to ‘digital commuting’ and a service-based sharing economy in areas as diverse as clothes and power tools. 
Green skills
An umbrella term for the technical skills, knowledge, behaviours and capabilities required to tackle the environmental challenges we face and to unlock new opportunities for growth. Our definition for environmental challenges goes beyond achieving the UK government net zero decarbonisation ambitions to include a more holistic view. The three core environmental challenges that green skills span are: 
ONS data
Deloitte analysed publicly available datasets on employment in the UK – accessed via the ONS ‘NOMIS’ website – to derive additional insights on the current state of green jobs across the UK. This included the Annual Population Survey on Employment by occupation (latest annual dataset available was the year to June 2021) and the annual Business Register and Employment Survey (latest annual dataset available was the year to December 2020).
IEMA commissioned a survey of 178 senior sustainability professionals. Alongside this survey, 34 organisations were engaged through roundtables and interviews to discuss the current state of green skills in their organisation and how they see the transition to the green economy progressing. Deloitte and IEMA hosted two roundtable events – one with private sector and one with public sector professionals. In addition, we conducted a series of interviews with sustainability leaders (e.g. Heads of Sustainability) and other senior sustainability professionals from a 
To get us to this vision of 2050 will require us to change the way we work and live – every industry and every business will change. That means every job will change and we will need to learn new skills as we go. In fact, all of our jobs will be greener – not just those in specialised sustainability areas, but everyone will need to learn about sustainability and develop green skills relevant to their roles.
•  Nature and biodiversity
•  Climate change and decarbonisation
•  Waste and pollution reduction
Green jobs 
Specialist roles that focus on specific domains or initiatives dedicated to improving environmental outcomes for an organisation or for the economy.
The faster we develop these new green skills, the faster we will be equipped to make the transition.
06
[Page #6]
Introduction
07
[Page #7]
INTRODUCTION
This is not just in sectors noticeably linked to heavy decarbonisation and energy transition. In fact, it appears that the fastest growing demand for green skills is in sectors such as luxury goods and internet technology. This could indicate that many organisations already recognise the competitive advantages that may result from early adoption of environmentally positive business models.
A one-size-fits-all approach to workforce transformation will not be enough.
Realigned incentives will be needed to persuade many current workers to develop green skills.
Green skills are increasingly sought after with job searches for green skills seeing double digit growth.2 
Individuals and job families within an organisation will require a tailored combination of skills and behaviours to improve performance of their team and organisation in the ‘green economy’. Our findings indicate that the application of green skills and knowledge in daily roles will be key to value realisation and that approaches will vary depending on the industry and key factors like emissions intensiveness. 
Much of the workforce has been trained in organisations that are optimised to generate economic value with relatively little thought to broader impact on people or planet. Embedding a green culture and developing green skills will need strategies and initiatives that break established habits and practices. Through incentives, symbols and role modelling, clear signals can be sent to the workforce on how the organisation chooses to operate, which behaviours and practices are valued and rewarded and where employees have autonomy to create wider impact. 
Sustainability professionals increasingly influence business model decisions.
Not only has there been an increase in demand for green skills, but these skills are also seen as more important with a trend towards elevating some sustainability professionals to executive positions. Sustainability professionals now need both subject matter knowledge, influencing and strategy skills to help make business model and organisational-level decisions.3 This suggests the emergence of both highly specialist sustainability roles to solve technical problems and generalist sustainability roles that work across their organisation to ensure alignment and coherence.
The shift to a green economy will create jobs within new and emerging sectors.
The biggest barrier is  inertia. It is just about getting things to change for businesses quickly enough to deliver the  outcomes we need.”
The emerging hydrogen sector will create 8-10,000 new jobs by 2030 and potentially up to 100,000 jobs by 2050.4 Carbon capture and storage is a nascent green sector but one that has been highlighted as vital by the IPCC.5 Building such an industry would require significant technical green capability to mobilise and scale. Both these sectors will require technical skills that may be in limited supply currently or sit in adjacent sectors. For example, project management skills used in oil and gas and engineering expertise all have great value to emerging green industries. Setting up these new and emerging sectors for success through early government commitments and education is seen as critical to enabling private sector organisations to have the confidence to invest in training their workforce.
Over the next decade we predict a green workforce emerging in which every employee understands how sustainability can create economic value. 
Adrian Barnes, Green Analytics, Green Investment Group, Macquarie Group
Environmental sustainability will be business as usual for this workforce, just as digital is to the workforce of today. This workforce will need the skills to take advantage of this change. The blend of green skills adoption, coupled with an environmentally sustainable workforce culture will inspire new business models and creative strategies that deliver for people, planet and profit. 
08
[Page #8]
Current state
09
[Page #9]
CURRENT STATE
The initial focus of our research was on understanding the present-day context of green skills and jobs across UK organisations, identifying workforce shifts, growth industries and skill gaps. This section lays out our findings. 
Green jobs increased by 8% from 2021 -2022 compared to total UK employment which increased by 0.5%
Green jobs and skills have been in the national spotlight in recent years. The UK government has outlined its intention to drive the creation of two million green jobs by 2030 as a key enabler for both the UK’s environmental agenda and regional levelling up initiatives.6 Several reports have been published in support of this intention, including the Green Jobs Taskforce report, which directly examined the state of green jobs and skills in the UK economy and offered a roadmap to motivate action.  Even so, the Environmental Audit Committee has since commented that government action to close the green skills gap is insufficient to fulfil the Net Zero Strategy’s ambitions.7 
Our research examined ONS and LinkedIn data, to uncover trends in demand and supply of green skills and jobs in the UK economy. Demand for candidates with green skills has seen a double-digit growth.8 Analysis of LinkedIn data shows that the pool of professionals working in green jobs increased by 8 per cent in the past year, whereas total UK employment increased by only 0.5 per cent in the same period.9 
LinkedIn data also suggests that green skills are becoming more widespread within workforces. The largest pools of employees with green skills in 2021 were within traditionally ‘green’ sectors of the economy, such as environmental services, construction and renewable energy, but the fastest growing pools of green skills were in the luxury goods, technology, finance, and health sciences sectors.10
10
[Page #10]
CURRENT STATE
In our interviews with sustainability executives, it was suggested to us that several barriers preventing the development of green skills and increases in green jobs were suggested. These include: 
Rapid growth in demand for green jobs and green skills in these sectors is evidence of growing demand in the wider economy. If demand increases at the pace shown in the data analysis, then the workforce for the green economy will have to grow rapidly if UK organisations are not to be starved of critical skills.
Top 5 industries for professionals with green skills, by talent pool size
1.  Environmental services
2.  Construction
Rapid growth in demand for green jobs and green skills in these sectors is evidence of growing demand in the wider economy.”
•  a widely held perception that green jobs and 
skills are limited to niche academic topics such as ecology and environmental management, for which extensive technical knowledge is required. 
3.  Higher education
Despite a need for green skills (across nature, biodiversity, waste and pollution) to date the focus of green jobs creation has been on decarbonisation and climate change. In our roundtable discussions and interviews with sustainability professionals the view was expressed that climate change dominates what organisations regard as the priority concern. This view is supported by the findings of a survey of sustainability executives carried out by the Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment (IEMA). The survey found that whereas climate change is in many cases a strategic and operational priority, other environmental topics, such as biodiversity and waste reduction are given much less attention.11 Climate change has been covered by the media (in the UK, Canada and USA) up to eight times more than biodiversity issues.12 The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Sixth Assessment Report clearly identifies restoration of the natural world as a major enabler for adaption to and mitigation of climate change.13 Moreover, wider environmental challenges cannot be ignored as they intrinsically impact our future prosperity.
4.  Renewables and environment
• 
limited clarity on the career paths for sustainability professionals/those with green skills.
5.  Government administration
Source: Analysis of data from LinkedIn Talent Insights
•  a lack of understanding around the breadth 
of green jobs and applicability of green skills. 
Top 5 industries for professionals with green skills, by percentage growth of talent pool (2020-1)
There is also a lack of workforce diversity in traditionally ‘green’ professions, especially within engineering which was seen by most interviewees as a key enabling sector for the green industrial revolution. According to a Green Jobs Taskforce report, only three per cent of environmental professionals are from ethnic minorities and only nine per cent of all engineers are women.14
1.  Luxury goods and jewellery 
2.  Internet
3.  Biotechnology
4.  Apparel and fashion
This and the barriers identified by those interviewed indicate that green jobs and skills are currently restricted to a specific segment of the workforce. However, our interviews and the Green Jobs Taskforce report state that by enabling greater diversity of thought to work on complex challenges, better solutions and outcomes could be delivered that benefit everyone in society.15
5.  Investment management
Source: Analysis of data from LinkedIn Talent Insights
11
[Page #11]
CURRENT STATE
Figure 1. Four shifts in the market for green jobs and green skills16
Four shifts in the market for green jobs and green skills
Shift 1Expansion of skills and scope in existing specialist sustainability roles
Shift 2Increased need for green skills in non-specialist roles
E.g. Recycling operative, sustainability manager
E.g. Marketing professional, product designer
We have identified four key shifts in the transition to green jobs and skills.
Shift 3Transition of workforces from unsustainable sectors to new roles
Shift 4Demand for green skills in new green sectors and organisations
E.g. Hydrogen plant operative, carbon capture  and storage engineer 
E.g. Oil rig marine engineer, vehicle assembly technician
12
[Page #12]
CURRENT STATE
Shift 1: Expansion of skills and scope in existing specialist sustainability roles
The fastest growing skills among sustainability professionals in the year to November 202118 (percentage increase)
As organisations seek to transition their business model for the green economy, greater responsibilities are likely to be placed in the short-to-medium term on existing sustainability professionals and teams. The Goal 13 Impact Platform, (an initiative by Deloitte, the CBI, Chapter Zero, Boomi, A4S, Dell and the Met Office) found that new roles are being created to address the complexities of decarbonisation, including ‘Programme Director of Carbon’ and ‘Chief Climate Risk Officer’.17
Sustainability teams now have to work at multiple levels. We have to build awareness that there is an issue, make sure everyone has all the right skills and capabilities and do institutional work within the organisation and we must tackle all those responsibilities at the same time.”
Finance (e.g. climate-related financial disclosure)
35%
From our interviews it seems that the demand for sustainability professionals has risen dramatically. Lack of capacity was frequently mentioned as a problem for sustainability teams. This encompassed demands from leadership to own the growing sustainability agenda, the need to upskill people across the organisation and to provide input to discussions on specific problems faced by other business functions.
30%
Presentation Skills
To fill this demand, many organisations are recruiting more dedicated environmental sustainability managers. In some cases, previously combined health, safety, and environment (HSE) roles are being split to create new environmental sustainability manager roles. This enables ownership and focus on sustainability training and compliance within the organisation.
Daniel Caborn, Talent and OD Manager, Wienerberger
20%
Analytical Skills
Source: Analysis of data from LinkedIn Talent Insights
13
[Page #13]
CURRENT STATE
Sustainability professionals are also expected to respond to technical, analytical and complex challenges and opportunities across a range of environmental topics. Many large companies are prioritising a strategy for decarbonisation and achieving net zero targets, and sustainability professionals will need to develop further skills in this area. For example, a Head of Sustainability we interviewed with an environmental management background has had to acquire skills in carbon target-setting, measurement and reporting, which represent new areas of responsibility.
The elevation of sustainability professionals to executive positions means that they will need not only strong technical and subject matter knowledge, but also skills in strategy and communication in order to contribute to top level decisions.22 This suggests that we may see the emergence of two separate types of role for sustainability professionals: highly specialist sustainability roles to solve technical problems, and generalist sustainability roles that work across the organisation to ensure alignment and coherence with company objectives.
Figure 2. Level of priority for environmental topics in organisations’ strategies and operations19 
Sustainability professionals are being involved increasingly in high-level discussions and long-term decision-making. Responses to the joint IEMA and Deloitte survey and interviews with sustainability leaders frequently included the comment that sustainability is often discussed at senior management level and it is important to involve individuals with a deep understanding of the subject.
Climatechange anddecarbonisation
Sustainability professionals may reach a career crossroad in the future; whether to remain as a sustainability specialist and develop their technical role, or whether to move to a role within a function and apply their green skills in those areas. In 2020, 77 per cent of sustainability managers were reporting regularly to their board of directors.20 Chief Sustainability Officers (CSOs), and Chief Climate Officers are also becoming increasingly common; between 2011 and 2020 there was a 228 per cent increase in the number of CSOs in Fortune 500 companies.21
Natureand biodiversity
Circular economy(and the reduction of pollution and waste)
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
Low priority
An area we have discussed
An area we would like to consider
An area we are currently considering
High priority
Source: Analysis of data from LinkedIn Talent Insights
14
[Page #14]
CURRENT STATE
Respondents and interviewees also pointed to the core workforce responsible for day-to-day operations (e.g. store workers in the retail sector or nurses in the health and social care sector) as a key area requiring transformation, which represents a large proportion of the total workforce in many organisations.
Figure 4. Types of roles where green skills gaps are currently most prevalent24 [% of survey respondents that selected the indicated role type in their top 3]
Shift 2: Increased need for green skills in non-specialist roles
Sustainability is not a department: it is fundamentally a cultural change.”
There was growing recognition from interviewees that successful organisations will need every team member to have some level of green skills to be effective in their role in the green economy. From our roundtable discussions and interviews with organisations, some were already planning to deploy strategies and initiatives to deliver this workforce transformation, though most were in very early stages of thinking on the value green skills could bring to their organisation. 
19%
29%
Figure 3. Percentage of respondents stating that by 2050, all jobs will require green/sustainability skills23 
CEO of a manufacturing business
21%
8%
While there has been a big increase in appointments of senior sustainability leaders, interview feedback consistently suggested that green skills are still largely confined to limited functions and teams within organisations. Numbers are concentrated particularly within sustainability or HSE functions. 
24%
26%
17%
25%
This is not the first time a radical shift has taken place in the economy. A recent shift many have experienced is the transformation to a digital economy. Some organisations initially introduced Chief Digital Officers (CDOs) and digital functions to begin exploring how to create value through digital and continue to operate in this manner. However fully mature digital businesses embed digital skills within all functions. This level of assimilation across the workforce enables mature digital businesses to operate in fundamentally different ways including agile responses to change.26 Organisations may be starting to seek a similar level of maturity in their green transition as illustrated by the emergence of Chief Sustainability Officers, with responsibility for implementing a strategy for green skills and products/services, and to deliver on these ambitions.
Finance
Operations / Distribution
In many organisations green skills are located in silos, with sustainability functions often responsible for ensuring that other parts of the organisation are acting sustainably in accordance with organisation policy, and that they are equipped to do so. 
Procurement and supply chain
HR / People
Risk and resilience management
Source: IEMA stakeholder survey, November 2021
In the private sector, responses to the IEMA stakeholder survey indicated that green skills are being developed in R&D/product design functions and at leadership levels above dedicated sustainability roles. In public sector organisations, survey respondents indicated that green skills are particularly strong in policy and estate/property management functions. Respondents viewed finance, which is likely to take responsibility for non-financial reporting and understanding of environmental sustainability in the context of investment and business cases, as the function where skills gaps were most prevalent. 
A 2019 study commissioned by the Greater London Authority found that over a quarter of jobs in the capital were in occupations facing increased demand for green skills or enhanced green skills in existing jobs, or were new emerging green roles (new jobs). Of these, 71 per cent were in managerial, professional, and associate professional and technical groups, and 14 per cent in skilled trades. Jobs in green occupations, such as those in a low-carbon circular economy, grew by 4.1 per cent on average between 2015-2019, compared to just 0.6 per cent in non-green occupations.25 
51%
Agree strongly
Disagree
Agree
Strongly disagree 0%
Unsure
The similarities between digital and sustainability do not end there.
Source: IEMA stakeholder survey, November 2021
15
[Page #15]
CURRENT STATE
Digital and green
More meaningful employment
A report by the World Economic Forum, Bridging Digital and Environmental Goals found that organisations are recognising the importance of digital skills and tools in achieving sustainability. For example, Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Internet of Things (IoT) sensors are being used to optimise resource usage and determine where improvements can be made in processes.27 Another report by BT, The future in 2021: emerging technologies paving the way to a brighter business future, found that leaders are looking to build teams that combine digital skillset with knowledge about environmental sustainability.28 However, many organisations still report that a lack of digital skills is hindering achievement of their business objectives.
Our interviews highlighted that another driver of the incorporation of green skills in non-specialist roles is personal motivation and enthusiasm among workers. The COVID-19 pandemic has enhanced people’s desire to make purposeful contributions through their jobs, with 40 per cent of the UK workforce (across all age groups) indicating that they are ‘somewhat likely’ to change jobs in the next six months, even without another job to go to.32 One of the main reasons given was a desire for meaning. 
In addition to food science and engineering, we will be training our colleagues in data management and improving their IT skills. Machines will be analysing data sets and adjusting to be more resource efficient. Our teams must be comfortable gathering and interpreting that data and using technology to maximise efficiencies.”
A Deloitte report, The worker-employer relationship disrupted, found evidence that younger generations of workers are actively seeking roles which incorporate green skills.33 An interview with a further education provider also revealed that students are putting pressure on institutions to deliver courses that include green skills training.
Some of the industries with the greatest challenges are those with significant potential to improve environmental outcomes for the UK, such as construction and manufacturing.29 Although the coronavirus pandemic accelerated the transition to digital, it also exacerbated the divide between those with digital skills and those without them.30 The number of young people taking IT subjects at GCSE, A Level, Further Education and in Apprenticeships has been in decline since 2015. Only 48 per cent of employers believe that young people are leaving full-time education with sufficiently advanced digital skills.31
Rachel Hackett, Group Sustainability Director, 2 Sisters Food Group
16
[Page #16]
CURRENT STATE
Acceleration towards clean and affordable British energy for the long term as set out in the British Energy Security Strategy, will depend on the ability to invest in green jobs within the renewables sector and equipping the current workforce to effectively transition to working in them. The government’s Ten Point Plan for a Green Industrial Revolution, together with its Net Zero Strategy, is already driving £100 billion of private sector investment by 2030 into new British industries, including offshore wind, and supporting around 480,000 green jobs in renewables by the end of the decade.38
However, the extent to which new UK jobs are created by BEV manufacturing depends on the extent of growth in EV manufacturing in the UK. Transport & Environment, the clean transport campaign group, suggests several UK factories are only committing to modest increases in manufacturing hybrid or BEV.44 In addition, the creation of new jobs may be constrained by the continued import of batteries from overseas. According to The Faraday Institution, the global BEV shift is already pressuring domestic vehicle manufacturers to consider moving production of BEVs offshore.45 
Shift 3: Transition of jobs from non-sustainable sectors to new roles
The UK labour market is already experiencing workforce transition from high carbon to low carbon industries. Workers from many sectors are concerned that their roles are being disrupted. An integrated programme of support from government, employers and educators to assist upskilling and reskilling will be required. 
Oil and gas, a breeding ground for green skills
While offshore oil and gas employs directly only an estimated 25,700 people, an additional 91,500 are indirectly employed in the wider ecosystem of businesses and workforces supporting the sector.34 According to the UK Oil and Gas Authority, the numbers are diminishing over time due to reduced investment in oil and gas and increased reliance on foreign imports.35 It is predicted that we will have reduced our gas consumption by over 40%  by 2030 (though this is expected to rise in 2022 before resuming a downward trend).36 Workers are likely to move to other roles based on their specialist skillsets and transferable skills.
The automotive transition
Car manufacturing is another sector facing disruption. There are currently 150,000 people involved directly in the industry in the UK. Some will experience minimal transition as the focus shifts from manufacturing internal combustion engine (ICE) cars to battery electric vehicles (BEVs). The UK government’s Net Zero Strategy predicts that by 2030, 74,000 jobs will be supported by decarbonising the transport sector.39 However, parts of the existing workforce will require retraining or upskilling. 
A report by Platform for Electronic Mobility and Boston Consulting Group, examining the European automotive workforce, estimates that up to 42 per cent of workers in the core and adjacent industries will have specific training needs by 2030.40 For example, the production of BEVs requires multi-skilled engineers who are comfortable with chemistry as well as mechanical and electrical engineering.41The disruption also affects car maintenance and servicing.42 The car maintenance workforce, which numbered a quarter of a million people in the UK in 2020, will require new skills to service BEVs.43
The 2016 HM Government Oil and Gas Workforce Plan, which addressed the falling demand for jobs in oil and gas, suggested that redundant oil and gas workers have skills applicable in many industries. For example, oil rig engineers can use their experience of deep-water support structures in jobs in the offshore wind sector; and electrical engineers in the oil and gas industry could switch their skills to installing wind turbines or in cable jointing at wind and solar farms.37 
17
[Page #17]
CURRENT STATE
Figure 5. Employment in select UK sectors, 2016-2020 (number of employees)
Other industries facing transition 
Plastics is another sector undergoing transition, due to regulation of plastic packaging and single-use plastic items. The introduction of the UK plastic packaging tax pentises companies if they produce or import packaging which does not contain at least 30 per cent recycled content. The aim of the tax is to provide a clear economic incentive for businesses to use recycled plastic in the manufacture of plastic packaging. At the global level the trend towards stricter regulation is partly driven by negotiations at the United Nations Environment Assembly for an international treaty on plastic pollution. This will have both predictable and less foreseeable impacts on the workforce shifts required across plastics and sectors currently linked heavily to plastic use.
180,000
160,000
140,000
We need to be retrofitting 60,000 homes a year in Greater Manchester, so we need people doing things pretty quickly. We’re upskilling job seekers and career switchers to get new people into the sector in order to meet this need.”
120,000
Manufacture of ICE cars*
Government communication on heat pumps, insulation and retrofitting is shifting awareness and demand for these products and services. The Greater Manchester Combined Authority is training over 1,000 workers in green skills, including domestic retrofitting, insulation and building treatments, external wall insulation, fenestration and cladding.
100,000
80,000
60,000
Joe Crolla, Skills Intelligence Lead, Greater Manchester Combined Authority 
Manufacture of plastic packing goodsand other plastic products
40,000
20,000
 Oﬀshore Oil and Gas
02016
2017
2018
2019
2020
*ICE = Internal combustion engineSource:  Deloitte analysis of ONS labour force data and UKOG Workforce Report 2021
18
[Page #18]
CURRENT STATE
A UK Net Zero Strategy objective is for the UK to be a leader in hydrogen and other sustainable technologies. Sustainability executives expressed hope that lessons could be learned from the growth of the wind power industry. The UK was slower than other European economies to build manufacturing capability and is now more reliant on imports for many of its turbines (despite having the world’s largest offshore wind energy market).50 UK businesses have significant expertise in power-to-liquid and carbon capture technologies. Government intervention to create large scale, export-focused manufacturing industries from these innovative starting points would be a strong creator of high-quality jobs across the UK.
Shift 4: Demand for green skills in new green sectors and organisations
Speed, support for, and clear communication from government to the private sector will be required to position the UK economy to reap the benefits from green technologies and sectors.
Just as the digital revolution led to the emergence of new organisations and sectors based on novel technologies, the shift to a green economy will create jobs within new emerging sectors. Innovate UK, a national innovation agency, includes net zero as a key tenet of its most recent strategy Building the future economy: Plan for action for UK business innovation. Respondents to the IEMA stakeholder survey also expect additional new roles to emerge, such as community biodiversity managers, pollution remediators and carbon sequestering experts. 
Hydrogen and carbon capture
Speed, support for, and clear communication from government to the private sector will be required to position the UK economy to reap the benefits from green technologies and sectors. Interviewees from the education and private sectors indicated that early government guidance would provide confidence to alter curricula and to invest in training. Both will be required will be required to provide enough skilled workers for these emerging sectors in order to minimise the need to import skilled workers or product from abroad.
Two emerging sectors are hydrogen and carbon capture usage and storage (CCUS). Hydrogen has been included as a key part of the government’s Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener plan for a transition to a green economy, with the sector expected to support up to 8,000-10,000 jobs by 2030 and potentially up to 100,000 jobs by 2050 (in a high hydrogen net zero scenario).46 The sector will require technical green skills that may be in limited supply currently or employed in adjacent sectors. For example, the hydrogen sector may need project management, Health, Safety and Environment (HSE) or engineering skills typically found in oil and gas.47 
CCUS is set to create green jobs in regional clusters, probably in four locations across the North East, Humber, North West, Scotland and/or Wales, with the potential for it to support up to 54,000 jobs by 2030.48 As with hydrogen, existing skillsets held by workers in non-renewable energy and resource sectors (oil and gas, and non-renewable energy generation) will be transferrable to CCUS projects, provided there is suitable retraining.49
19
[Page #19]
Unlocking
the future
20
[Page #20]
UNLOCKING THE FUTURE
Courageous leadership that takes calculated risksPrivate sector attendees at our roundtables said that being an early adopter in the green economy can mean taking a leap of faith. This may yield high rewards but may also be destabilising, particularly if there is a shift in political will and direction. Early adoption of sustainable strategies and practices requires courageous strategic decision making. Organisations that want to transition successfully to the green economy must have strong leadership with sufficient foresight and awareness of the opportunities that environmental sustainability can bring to their industry. 
Characteristics of a winning organisation in the green economyTo unlock success in the green economy, sustainability leaders pointed at the need for organisations to have certain winning characteristics that will be critical for establishing an environmentally conscious culture focused on value capture.
Sustainability is viewed as another thing to do, whereas it will just be part of a process integrated into our daily systems and roles. Some teams will have more new learning to do than others. We want to give our people the skills and tools to help them integrate sustainability.”
Someone has to have the courage to make the first move, to be visionary and brave in leading their organisation to the future.”
Rebecca Harris, Environmental Sustainability Team at Network Rail
Kay Barker, UK Environmental Lead at Wienerberger
21
[Page #21]
UNLOCKING THE FUTURE
Intentional enterprise-level transformation, design and management 
Mission based teams that solve for the unpredictable
Superficial changes in fragmented pockets of an organisation will not be sufficient for the transformational change required to prosper in the green economy. Organisations that embed environmental sustainability into their corporate vision, strategy and objectives will be better placed to deliver enterprise-wide business transformation. 
To tackle complex challenges such as climate change, resource scarcity and biodiversity loss, organisations will need to consider whether their structures are fit for purpose, utilising the right talent to solve urgent problems rapidly within short timescales.51 Some organisations are already reorganising their hierarchies and team structures to mobilise multidisciplinary teams to collaborate around a common mission. Bringing together sustainability experts with experts in other areas such as digital, product design, change management and customer service, can unlock systems thinking and enable holistic problem solving across teams, functions and processes.
We need a systems approach to change that connects the new products we produce to the building industry and then to homeowners. For example, builders know how to lay a regular brick, but don’t know how to lay a lower-carbon brick that is thinner. We need to help bricklayers adapt to using different materials and to educate everyone in the construction system about the benefits they bring so they buy more environmentally-friendly materials and homeowners live in more sustainable homes.”
Environmentally sustainable mindset as the norm for everyone
Organisations that operate sustainably cannot rely solely on a sustainability department to meet their diverse needs. Instead, all employees will need to have strong environmental awareness. Examples of where sustainability leaders have identified potential opportunities for mindset shifts include procurement teams making commercial decisions based on embedded carbon and impact across the whole product lifecycle, and sales staff incentivised to offer the sustainable option as the standard.
Daniel Caborn, Talent and OD Manager at Wienerberger
22
[Page #22]
UNLOCKING THE FUTURE
Investment in a diverse and inclusive workforce
Organisations will need to think through their sustainability values and offerings to attract and retain talent and customers. Organisations with sustainable values are increasingly sought after by younger generations coming into the workforce and those looking to switch to a more purpose-driven career. A commitment to diversity and inclusion is not only the right thing to do but also good business - organisations where employees’ diverse perspectives are heard and stimulated are more productive and have higher employee satisfaction.52
Improving workforce diversity mean a greater wealth of ideas and approaches around how we tackle the big issues and challenges and will help to drive positive change.”
Our marketing team worked with the sustainability and product development teams to understand products’ impact in the world. They are using this as part of their strategy to sell a story of what they can do for the customer and the world.”
Engagement in an ecosystem of strategic partnerships 
Ben Goodwin, Head of Policy, IEMA
Winning organisations will interact with their supply chains and unlikely partners to accelerate green transformation and value capture. Large organisations that have seized the opportunity to work with their suppliers to reduce carbon emissions will be ahead of the curve with regard to regulatory standards and opportunity capture. Partnerships with other organisations provide opportunities for mutual upskilling and training, and to enable a systems thinking approach to problem solving. 
Karen White, Global Health, Safety & Environment, TT Electronics
23
[Page #23]
UNLOCKING THE FUTURE
Case study
Unilever and SUEZ operate as ecosystem partners to share upskilling of apprentices 
“We can inspire the next generation of packaging and waste management professionals to place the circular economy at the heart of their work.”
Unilever and SUEZ partnered to launch an Apprentice Exchange Programme in 2021 to improve knowledge of product lifecycles. Over a three-month programme, a group of apprentices spend one half-day a week with the partner organisation. The aim of these sessions is for apprentices to understand the other’s operations from the ground up.
Apprentices learn the challenges and opportunities that exist in creating a more circular economy. The programme, which includes a packaging project, is an example of cross value chain collaboration as apprentices see the larger impact of their work. John Scanlon, Chief Executive Officer for SUEZ Recycling and Recovery UK, said in a press release that through the programme, “we can inspire the next generation of packaging and waste management professionals to place the circular economy at the heart of their work.”
24
[Page #24]
UNLOCKING THE FUTURE
A toolkit to activate green skills in organisations This report not only aims to provide an overview of the prevailing trends towards green skills but also give practical insights and tools that can be used by organisations to capture and retain value in the green economy.
ORGANISATION ‘GREEN’ MATURITY MATRIX: DOMAIN THEMES (1 OF 2)
An organisation’s propensity to address ‘green’ challenges may influence the skills and jobs required.
Maturity example indicators:
Theme:
Understanding
Developing
Performing 
Leading
•  Contracts acquire 100% renewable energy for any remaining sites.•  Has explored feasibility/cost for 
•  100% renewable energy in office and 
•  Set up contracts to purchase 100% renewable energy where available.
•  Has engaged and continues to engage with suppliers/landlords to assess feasibility and cost of purchasing Renewable Energy (RE) at owned/leased sites.
operations where available. 
•  Measures scope 1, 2 and 3 emissions 
•  Identified potential for on-site renewables e.g. solar panels. 
Climate change
green gas.
and reports on this regularly.•  Operates a 100% hybrid/electric/ 
•  Works with strategic suppliers on 
•  Developed roadmap to reach net zero 
their Net Zero target.
fuel cell fleet.
emissions in own operations.
•  Baseline scope 1 and 2 greenhouse gas emissions and includes these in annual public reports (where relevant).
•  Is transparent over emissions of all 
•  Tracks strategic suppliers’ emissions 
•  Created low-to-zero carbon mobility 
purchased goods and services.•  Purchases 100% carbon removal 
targets and progress.
strategy.
•  Invests in technology and innovations 
•  Introduced requirement that suppliers 
•  Has developed understanding of  
offsets that also drive innovation,  e.g. biodiversity benefits or seed finance for scalable long-term carbon removal solutions.
to reduce emissions from hard-to-abate processes.
share their emissions data.
cross-organisation mobility and where the greatest opportunities are.
•  Purchases 100% carbon removal offsets, covering operations and value chain.
The second part of the toolkit sets out a simple blueprint of a ‘model organisation’ in the green economy by showcasing the type of green skills that each function or job family might need.
2
•  Created an ecosystem to accelerate the enhancement of biodiversity via alliances with partner organisations, suppliers and customers.
•  Meets biodiversity targets by restoring nature that has been impacted by organisational operations.
•  Created an action plan including targets to protect and enhance surrounding biodiversity e.g. regenerative agriculture, green roofs, improved recycling/processing of hazardous waste.
•  Complies with biodiversity laws 
and regulation.
•  Documents the direct and indirect impacts each site/location has on surrounding nature and environment.
Nature and natural resources
•  Assigns accurate value to natural 
•  Actively implements actions to 
services used by the organisation and factored into investment decisions.•  Developed metrics to measure the 
minimise value chain impact on the natural environment.
•  Developed innovation portfolio of 
•  Tracks and reports on a number of 
impact of the organisation’s services on the natural environment.
processes and technology to reduce impact on natural resources, e.g. materials science, remanufacturing.
KPIs that demonstrate the impact of the organisation and its goods/services on the natural environment.
•  Maximises circular economy-related 
•  Created a circular economy strategy to enable a reduction in total waste production of 50%/FTE; recycling rates >75%; and eliminated avoidable single-use plastic from workplaces.
•  Produced resource efficiency plan to tackle significant sources of waste; recycle >50% of our waste; and divert 100% of total waste from landfill.
•  Has set up governance, procedures 
opportunities to deliver waste reduction of 75%/FTE; and eliminated all single-use plastic and all avoidable waste from our workplaces.
and appropriate infrastructure to drive resource efficiency.
CUSTOMER SERVICE/SUPPORT
Pollution and waste
Key:
Gives customers information about products and services, takes orders, and process returns. 
 Current state   
 Transition to 2030   
 Final state by 2050 
EACs = Energy Attribute Certificate
Customer service/support
04
CONTENTS
BACK
NEXT
Effective communication, influence and persuasion, data analysis.
Core competencies:
•  Consumerism and the circular economy.•  Economy and universal basic income.
•  AI, automation, robotics and blockchain.•  Purpose and value-led organisations.
Key external drivers for the change:
The first part of the toolkit contains a maturity matrix to identify gaps and possible option to activate and elevate green skills within an organisation.
1
Green skills:
Knowledge
Technical skills
Behaviours
Competencies
•  Inspires customers to lead more 
•  Mindset shift from transactional to experiential customer service (enhancing service and advice across whole product/service lifecycle) .
•  Ability to analyse customer feedback 
•  Understands the importance of sustainability credibility and transparency.
sustainable lifestyles.
to identify sustainability-related product/organisational opportunities .
To help organisations mobilise green skills across their workforce, we have developed a standalone toolkit. The toolkit was developed on the basis of pre existing experience and application, and was further developed through our roundtables, interviews and feedback gathered from stakeholders.
Leadership
•  Combines problem-solving, and 
•  Highly collaborative across internal 
•  Ability to diagnose fixes, offer 
•  Deep understanding of low carbon product ranges and alternatives.
commercial awareness to work with adjacent teams to address customer sustainability concerns.
teams, driving toward climate positive solutions for customers.
sustainable alternatives and offer advise on products from cradle to grave.
•  Understands product lifecycle, supply chain impacts and carbon labelling.
Management
•  Engages and supports customers to fulfil their sustainable lifestyle needs.
•  Strong communicative skills and 
•  Ability to fix and repair modular parts and show customers how to keep/maintain products for longer. 
•  Knowledge of company sustainability vision, credentials and sustainability related product information.
empathy to engage with customers on sustainability queries or issues.
Operational
States:
Low
High
Low
High
Low
High
Low
High
The knowledge and support customer service teams provide to their customers will vary based on the product and customer base. For example, in a B2B transaction, showcasing standardised sustainability metrics, KPIs and certificates will be vital for sales. Whereas in a B2C transaction, more storytelling and customer friendly metrics (e.g. carbon labelling) will be used to sell to customers. The type of product will also dictate the level of sustainability knowledge and advice teams will need to provide e.g. across food, fashion, tech, travel etc.
Variance by sector:
Experience: 
Low
High
There are two parts to the toolkit, each part can be used either in isolation or together as a set to help design a tailored journey at an organisation level or within individual teams or projects.
12
CONTENTS
BACK
NEXT
25
[Page #25]
UNLOCKING THE FUTURE
The maturity matrix is in two parts. It helps organisations consider where they stand in terms of: 
Using the toolkit
Mapping your green skills maturity 
ORGANISATION ‘GREEN’ MATURITY MATRIX: DOMAIN THEMES (1 OF 2)
An organisation’s propensity to address ‘green’ challenges may influence the skills and jobs required.
Maturity example indicators:
Take our interactive green maturity quiz quiz to find out where you and your organisation is in relation to your readiness to address green challenges and mobilise green skills in your organisation.
Theme:
Understanding
Developing
Performing 
Leading
•  Contracts acquire 100% renewable energy for any remaining sites.•  Has explored feasibility/cost for 
•  100% renewable energy in office and 
•  Set up contracts to purchase 100% renewable energy where available.
•  Has engaged and continues to engage with suppliers/landlords to assess feasibility and cost of purchasing Renewable Energy (RE) at owned/leased sites.
operations where available. 
•  Measures scope 1, 2 and 3 emissions 
•  Identified potential for on-site renewables e.g. solar panels. 
The ability to capture value from green skills through internal capabilities e.g. the ability of for example, HR, IT, finance to leverage green skills in their specific role to create value for the organisation. 
Climate change
green gas.
and reports on this regularly.•  Operates a 100% hybrid/electric/ 
•  Works with strategic suppliers on 
•  Developed roadmap to reach net zero 
1b
their Net Zero target.
fuel cell fleet.
emissions in own operations.
•  Baseline scope 1 and 2 greenhouse gas emissions and includes these in annual public reports (where relevant).
•  Is transparent over emissions of all 
•  Tracks strategic suppliers’ emissions 
•  Created low-to-zero carbon mobility 
purchased goods and services.•  Purchases 100% carbon removal 
targets and progress.
strategy.
•  Invests in technology and innovations 
•  Introduced requirement that suppliers 
•  Has developed understanding of  
offsets that also drive innovation,  e.g. biodiversity benefits or seed finance for scalable long-term carbon removal solutions.
to reduce emissions from hard-to-abate processes.
share their emissions data.
cross-organisation mobility and where the greatest opportunities are.
•  Purchases 100% carbon removal offsets, covering operations and value chain.
A tailored summary of your responses and indicative next steps will be provided.
•  Created an ecosystem to accelerate the enhancement of biodiversity via alliances with partner organisations, suppliers and customers.
•  Meets biodiversity targets by restoring nature that has been impacted by organisational operations.
•  Created an action plan including targets to protect and enhance surrounding biodiversity e.g. regenerative agriculture, green roofs, improved recycling/processing of hazardous waste.
•  Complies with biodiversity laws 
and regulation.
•  Documents the direct and indirect impacts each site/location has on surrounding nature and environment.
Nature and natural resources
•  Assigns accurate value to natural 
•  Actively implements actions to 
services used by the organisation and factored into investment decisions.•  Developed metrics to measure the 
minimise value chain impact on the natural environment.
•  Developed innovation portfolio of 
•  Tracks and reports on a number of 
impact of the organisation’s services on the natural environment.
processes and technology to reduce impact on natural resources, e.g. materials science, remanufacturing.
ORGANISATION ‘GREEN’ MATURITY MATRIX: DISCIPLINE THEMES (2 OF 2)
KPIs that demonstrate the impact of the organisation and its goods/services on the natural environment.
An organisation’s maturity of internal capabilities may influence the green skills and jobs required.
•  Maximises circular economy-related 
•  Created a circular economy strategy to enable a reduction in total waste production of 50%/FTE; recycling rates >75%; and eliminated avoidable single-use plastic from workplaces.
•  Produced resource efficiency plan to tackle significant sources of waste; recycle >50% of our waste; and divert 100% of total waste from landfill.
•  Has set up governance, procedures 
opportunities to deliver waste reduction of 75%/FTE; and eliminated all single-use plastic and all avoidable waste from our workplaces.
and appropriate infrastructure to drive resource efficiency.
Maturity example indicators:
Pollution and waste
Theme:
Understanding
Developing
Performing 
Leading
EACs = Energy Attribute Certificate
•  Has set out and obtained more ambitious 
•  Utilises performance management 
•  Identified climate-related risks and 
•  Has set a commitment to reduce carbon emissions in line with 1.5°C pathway and identify wider sustainability goals.
04
CONTENTS
BACK
NEXT
targets e.g. gross zero emissions.•  Recognised as a leading organisation for championing acceleration towards low-carbon sustainable future. 
system to incentivise actions in support of sustainability commitments
physical and transition risks over short, medium and long term.
Management
•  Certified internal procedures against 
•  Embedded risk management processes into business operations and create a governance structure to oversee.•  Identified sustainability initiatives.
relevant local and international standards.•  Planned and tracks sustainability actions.
•  Identified executive sponsor to be 
accountable for delivery of firmwide strategy.
 Readiness to address green challenges e.g. climate change, nature and natural resources, pollution and waste.
•  All new strategic contracts meet set 
• 
Included supplier requirement to set net zero/sustainability strategy commitment.
•  Requires that suppliers share their 
•  Engaged and continues to work with 
requirements.
emissions data.
procurement team to embed sustainability requirements/KPIs into processes.
1a
•  Built capacity for training suppliers on building sustainable supply chains.
•  Developed and tracks supplier sustainability KPIs for further monitoring and analytics.
•  Established and implemented process to ensure minimum standards are met and include compliance function.
Procurement
•  Identified sustainability risks associated 
with each procurement category.
•  Migrated on-site storage and services 
•  Inserted sustainability requirements 
•  Developed procedures to manage impacts and promote circularity.
•  Understands negative environmental impacts of IT across end-to-end use
to a cloud-based solution.
into all major IT contracts.
•  Built eminence and alliances by sharing 
•  Demonstrated that 100% of eWaste 
•  Developed long-term data storage and legacy hardware/software policies. 
•  Educated employees on digital 
IT 
best practices across the industry.
has been re-used or recycled. 
pollution and mitigation.
•  ESG pension fund divested fully from 
•  Ensured that ESG specialist funds 
•  Ensured that employees have the 
•  Reviewed *ESG credentials of pension fund providers and ensured these are clear to employees.
fossil fuel extraction. 
are available as default options to all employees.
option to invest in ESG specialist funds.
•  Further enhanced and refined the ESG investment framework, including best practices and learnings.
•  Created an investment framework that integrates ESG targets into the decision-making criteria.
Finance
•  Assessed and reflected on investments 
•  Understands the role ESG plays in 
made via ESG framework. 
investment decisions.
•  Leveraged incentives and messaging at 
•  Uses incentives against green/sustainability metrics for performance management of leadership and some management roles.
•  Ensured that employees are offered training to develop base level of understanding of sustainability.
•  Understands where sustainability/
all levels to fully internalise the principles of sustainability in organisational culture.
green skills capability gaps exist in the workforce. 
•  Offered specialist and relevant green 
•  Embedded technical sustainability 
•  Built plan for developing future green skills aligned to the needs and strategy of the organisation and external macro trends.
HR/people
skills/sustainability training programmes for employees in all job families.
training in **L&D and career pathways for specific job roles.
*ESG = Environmental and Social Governance, **L&D = Learning and Development
05
CONTENTS
BACK
NEXT
26
[Page #26]
UNLOCKING THE FUTURE
Exploring the model organisation blueprint 
This blueprint takes a deep dive into what a thriving organisation in the green economy looks like at a job family/function level. 
Customer service/ support
Marketing & sales/business development
Operations, distribution, manufacturing
To see the full model organisation blueprint, including a breakdown of green skills for each job family, download the standalone toolkit here.
To develop our ‘model organisation’ blueprint, we took a view of a typical organisation and identified 11 common job families (e.g. marketing, finance, HR, IT etc.).
Front office job families
For each job family, the potential green skills were categorised in terms of knowledge, technical skills, behaviours and competencies.
R&D/ innovation/product design
Supply chain (internal & external)
Finance
Legal
HR/people
IT/digital
Estates & physical assets
Exec. board and non-exec.
Back office job families
27
[Page #27]
UNLOCKING THE FUTURE
Breakdown of green skills for each job family 
Taking each job family in turn, we mapped the potential green skills that each job family might have and benefit from in the green economy. 
JOB FAMILY
Key:
Summary of function
 Current state   
 Transition to 2030   
 Final state by 2050 
Use this blueprint to identify gaps in green skills across your organisation. Consult existing skills maps, job descriptions and competency frameworks in your organisation. Consider working with HR or L&D Teams to mobilise training needs analysis. 
Job family
 The standard abilities and characteristics required to perform the role, these are non-sustainability related.
Core competencies:
A summary of trends that are shifting the requirements for this role and how it will be performed in the future.
Key external drivers for the change:
Green skills:
Knowledge
Technical skills
Behaviours
Competencies
Leadership
Describes the sustainability competencies required to effectively perform a job role based on level of seniority. E.g. horizon scanning for the latest sustainability trends and solutions. 
Describes the behaviours, attitudes and mindset required to embed sustainability in a job role based on level of seniority. E.g. championing sustainability initiatives across the organisation. 
Describes the sustainability knowledge, awareness and understanding required to fulfil the job role based on level of seniority. E.g. awareness of the Sustainable Development Goals.
Describes the technical skills capabilities required to drive sustainability in a job role based on level of seniority. E.g. carbon footprint analysis.
Management
Operational
The scale below shows the level of knowledge technical skills, behaviours and competencies required to transition from current state to future state.
States:
Low
High
Low
High
Low
High
Low
High
An indication and example of how the role of the job family may vary from sector to sector, organisation to organisation.
Variance by sector:
Experience: 
Low
High
45
CONTENTS
BACK
NEXT
28
[Page #28]
UNLOCKING THE FUTURE
Blockers and enablers to green transition 
Maturity
Blocker
Description
Potential Enablers
Blockers and enablers for developing green skills were discussed in a series of interviews and round tables that we held with a range of sustainability professionals. A number of proven enablers for overcoming them were also identified. In the following table, we map the blockers and potential enablers to different levels of ‘green’ maturity to guide thinking about potential next steps to take.
Employees have limited understanding of the green transition, why sustainable practices are important, and how they will affect their day-to-day roles, business, sector, and the UK economy generally
•  Employee engagement campaigns with clear and 
  Establishing a base level of knowledge
consistent messaging on sustainability 
•  Role-specific training
Level 1: Understanding
• 
Interactive Environmental Management System (EMS) that shows environmental performance and impact  
  Case study: 2 Sisters Food Group
Leaders have limited understanding of how sustainability and green skills could add value in their organisation and are unclear on the business case for change
•  Presenting the business case for green skills
  Leadership understanding of the value of green skills
•  Showcasing quick wins with job families that are 
already changing 
Click on the mouse symbol to be taken to more detail about each blocker and case study of a potential enabler.
Organisations are not sure where the gaps in green skills are, or how to measure and prioritise them. Lack of a clear strategy and plan of action means investment is hard to secure 
•  Use the 
  model organisation blueprint  
  Limited strategy, planning  and investment
to identify green skill gaps across job families in your organisation
Please note that when organisations have been listed alongside a maturity level as a case study, this reflects their actions to enable change, not their level of maturity.
Level 2: Developing
•  Work with Learning and Development functions 
to create development plans
While governance is important for supporting change, bureaucracy and red tape can hinder the ability to flex ways of working in order to adopt new green behaviours and develop a green culture
•  Forming mission-based teams to focus on 
  Rigid processes and structures  inflexible to change
outcomes
•  Utilise green networks which may sit across organisation structures, to share learning 
  Case study: TT Electronics
Green skills training is seen as time-intensive
•  Blended learning in the form of modular training 
  Competing priorities and time  
and on the job learning
  management challenges
Competing priorities mean that sustainability practices are seen as less important or as an additional ask on top of busy schedules
  Case study: Deloitte
•  Prioritisation of work based on company values 
•  Reorganisation of team structures to reflect 
priorities
•  Adoption of agile working
29
[Page #29]
UNLOCKING THE FUTURE
Maturity
Blocker
Description
Potential Enablers
Future uncertainty and cautious risk management mean that leadership is unwilling to pursue sustainability innovation
•  Clear policy and regulatory direction from government 
  Leaders wary of acting first
•  Green grants and investments into early-stage innovation 
•  Leadership peer-to-peer networks and sharing of lessons 
Level 3: Performing
learned  
Investment in green skills and initiatives consists of one-off activities, with limited focus on maintaining green capabilities and behaviours across the organisation 
•  Climate related financial disclosure, science based targets and 
  Green skills are not embedded for the long term
social value objectives set at the organisational level
•  Role-specific incentives, performance reviews and KPIs linked to 
It is difficult to track and measure the value green skills bring to job families and the organisation as a whole
environmental and wider sustainable practices  
  Case study: Speedy Services
•  Continuous green skills learning and development e.g. 
conferences, professional networks, peer-to-peer learning
•  Management and leadership role modelling of green behaviours 
to instil a positive culture 
Suppliers and partners are not so advanced in their green skills journey, causing misalignment in ways of working 
•  Supplier forums and engagement to collaboratively improve, 
  Supply chain and partners maturity
supplier upskilling, and certification
•  Building social value KPIs into the lifecycle of contracts to enable 
Level 4: Leading
monitoring and measurement
  Case study: Deloitte 
Limited specialist talent with technical green skills, and the organisation struggles to attract or access specialist talent
•  Government and industry working together to develop early career learning pathways and apprenticeship routes for new talent
  Lack of specialist talent
•  Government and industry run green jobs and careers fairs and 
school outreach programmes  
  Case study: National Grid
30
[Page #30]
UNLOCKING THE FUTURE
Organisational blockers and enablers
Level 1: Understanding
Example enabling initiatives:
Organisation-wide training integrated: A number of the organisations in our interviews had launched, or were in the process of launching, environmental sustainability awareness training in order to build a base level of knowledge among their workforces.
Establishing a base level of knowledge
Sustainability leaders interviewed by Deloitte said that their workforce had mixed levels of sustainability knowledge and a limited understanding of how green skills can be applied in their job. This meant that opportunities for improvements in sustainable ways of operating were not recognised. Generational differences in environmental awareness were often mentioned in discussions. Millennials and younger generations entering the workforce were seen to be more motivated by environmental awareness. However, awareness of environmental issues did not always translate into an understanding of how to apply green skills in the workplace.
Establishing an Environmental Management System (EMS): An EMS consists of processes and practices that enable an organisation to reduce its negative environmental impacts whilst increasing operating efficiency. Some organisations made their EMS interactive and accessible to employees through apps, dashboards and tangible metrics. Building understanding around environmental actions and impacts via an EMS can be a good first step towards improving sustainability practices. 
“It is essential that we mainstream climate action so that it becomes business as usual.”IEMA stakeholder survey respondent
Understanding
Developing
Performing
Leading
31
[Page #31]
UNLOCKING THE FUTURE
Case study
2 Sisters Food Group’s Environmental Management System provides a central knowledge hub
Environmental management controls at 2 Sisters Food Group (2SFG) used to be on an individual site-by-site level, with sites having limited access to best practice across the group.
The EMS provides a live platform that enables sites to host their own systems and ways of working in addition to the group level approach, and it encourages networking between sites and the sharing of best practice. The EMS is hosted on the company’s intranet and is the go-to place for any environmental information. Since the implementation of the EMS there has been a notable improvement in environmental performance, such as reductions in energy use and pollution, and an improvement in relations with regulatory authorities.
A central Environmental Management System (EMS) was put in place in 2019 to create a central knowledge hub for environmental policies, procedures and records. 
32
[Page #32]
UNLOCKING THE FUTURE
Develop a clear business case: Among our interviewees, Chief Human Resources officers (CHROs) focused on the need for a clear business case to secure buy-in from leadership. Leaders want to see clear benefits from investment in green skills and the risks that arise by not acting. 
Leadership understanding of the value of green skills
Among respondents to the IEMA stakeholder survey, 41 per cent indicated that ‘Lack of experience/knowledge among leaders’ is a key blocker to developing green skills in their organisation. Sustainability leaders interviewed by Deloitte suggested that some leaders did not understand the urgency for change or the value that green skills can bring to the organisation’s performance and workforce satisfaction. 
A number of interviewees commented on the work they were doing on formation of business case for green transformation. Most considered that it was important to start the business case with the organisation’s strategic priorities and objectives as the anchor, rather than focusing on environmental compliance and risk alone.
Example enabling initiatives:
Share quick wins: Increasingly, we heard in interviews that organisations are investing in systems and methods to monitor and report on their environmental performance and impacts. This can reveal where environmental improvements are being made and value added, contributing to the business case for green workforce transformation. 
Among respondents to the IEMA stakeholder survey, 41 per cent indicated that ‘Lack of experience/knowledge among leaders’ is a key blocker to developing green skills in their organisation.
In a number of organisations procurement teams were identified as an early win with this tactic. They reportedly now have strong green skills in a number of organisations due to the communicated quick wins of embedding social value frameworks and sustainability considerations in commercial decisions. 
33
[Page #33]
UNLOCKING THE FUTURE
Embed green skills in HR-led learning and development: Some organisations are now including green skills as a pillar of their HR team remit. Continuous upskilling will be required for both sustainability professionals and non-specialists. An understanding of commercial potential was seen by interviewees as a key enabler for sustainability professionals; and providing an understanding of environmental issues and their implications for the business model was seen as a key enabler for employees in other functions, particularly finance and operations.
Level 2: Developing
Example enabling initiatives: 
Green networks: Some interviewees commented on the value of green networks, such as office-wide programmes to reduce plastic, food waste and energy use. These grassroots movements can build up interest and appetite within the organisation for sustainable behaviours, and they often operate outside rigid organisational structures. However, the most impactful green networks were seen to be those endorsed and empowered by the leadership.
Limited strategy, planning and investment
A number of our interviewees said they were unsure how to begin systematically identifying the green skills gaps across their organisation. They pointed to an absence of universal standards or competency frameworks for the green skills required in each type of job. The lack of frameworks added to the task of mobilising required green skills development. 
We receive a huge amount of scrutiny on our figures from leadership when making business cases. Because we’re asking for investment that will pay off in the long-term, we need to prove that it is worthwhile by modelling impact.”
Planning and funding cycles were also considered restrictive when it comes to building long term organisation-wide green skills capabilities. Some interviewees identified restrictions imposed by departmental budgets and annual timeframes; others felt that their approach to planning was outdated in view of the speed of change experienced over the past ten years. 
Model the impact of green programmes to show value: Two of our interviewees were using or setting up a modelling capability to demonstrate how their organisation and its financial performance would be affected in the short, medium and long term by investments in green programmes and environmental changes.
Rebecca Harris, Environmental Sustainability Team at Network Rail
We’re not a nimble, agile fintech… It takes two to three years to get anything done.”
Interviewees also feel that uncertainty around policy, technology and economic trends is a further barrier to green skills development. It was felt that the absence of a holistic business strategy on green skills was restricting decision-making related to the training and the resources required. 
Rigid processes and structures inflexible to change
Some interviewees from large organisations commented on the size of their business as a blocker to wholesale transformation. The perceived underlying causes included the sheer number of staff, ‘red tape and bureaucratic processes’ and legacy governance approaches in need of redesign. Consideration of the environmental impact is often seen as a separate and additional lens through which to view investment and decision-making. Interviewees felt that fundamental changes were needed to integrate environmental considerations into decision-making, rather than seeing them as separate issue.
Example enabling initiatives:
Model organisation blueprint: A model organisation blueprint can be used to identify green skill gaps across jobs. A structured approach to mapping green skills gaps by means of comparison with a model blueprint is included within our toolkit. 
Operational head of department, UK Financial Services business
Understanding
Developing
Performing
Leading
34
[Page #34]
UNLOCKING THE FUTURE
Case study
TT Electronics’ green network supports carbon reduction
In 2019, at the TT Electronics site in Bedlington a purchasing manager led an initiative to use reusable bags and water bottles and identify single-use plastic items on-site that could be replaced. With CEO sponsorship the ‘pass on single-use plastics’ initiatives spread organisation-wide to 23 sites.
A Sustainability Council links Environmental Champions across all sites globally to share, learn, and implement improvements. The cumulative impacts of all initiatives were demonstrated in TT’s 2021 annual report, which noted a 31 per cent reduction in CO2e emissions from 2019 (Scope 1 and 2 emissions), the recycling more than 59 per cent of waste from 16 sites with 3 manufacturing sites achieved zero waste to landfill in 2021, and a 16% reduction in the weight of single-use plastics purchased in 2021 vs 2020. 
This is just one example of the initiatives provided by TTE’s Environmental Champions network. Organisation-wide recognition and good practice sharing in company newsletters. Strong support from TT Electronics Leadership is at the heart of how we think about the future to continue to motivate and fund additional initiatives.
35
[Page #35]
UNLOCKING THE FUTURE
Tailored and blended learning: To minimise the time spent on training, bite-size training, on the job development and learning by doing can be utilised. Knowledge boosters and tailored information can be shared through emails, posters, lunch-and-learn sessions, speakers at company meetings, or start-of-shift briefings. A strong sense of personal/ professional learning and development can be encouraged by certification, tailored learning and KPIs for each role.
Competing priorities and time management challenges 
The time dedicated to train employees in green skills is still seen as lost productivity or a challenge to business continuity. Sustainability leaders interviewed by Deloitte felt that it would be particularly difficult to dedicate their time to the training required, given their sense that other things are more pressing priorities. 
In addition to the investment of time in training, another challenge mentioned by interviewees was day-to-day workload. To embed sustainability across the organisation some employees may be required to take on additional responsibilities alongside their normal roles. For some, this may require changing the way they work and becoming familiar with new standards or IT software. This initially puts pressure on workloads. Several interviewees observed that their finance teams struggled to take on the now mandatory climate-related financial disclosures, which then fell to the sustainability teams to deliver. 
The time dedicated to train employees in green skills is still seen as lost productivity or a challenge to business continuity.
Example enabling initiatives:
Prioritisation of work based on company values: Some interviewees highlighted cases where, in organisations committed to green transformation, green skills development was an explicit qualifying factor in prioritising work. Where a proposed initiative had the potential to develop green skills capabilities, it was ‘upweighted’ against business-as-usual work.
36
[Page #36]
UNLOCKING THE FUTURE
Case study
Deloitte pursues a global climate learning programme 
Deloitte is committed to engaging all employees in its sustainability strategy and to building the skills of practitioners who support clients on their own sustainability journeys.
Deloitte is committed to engaging all employees in its sustainability strategy and to building the skills of practitioners who support clients on their own sustainability journeys. In August 2021 Deloitte rolled out its climate learning programme, developed in collaboration with the World Wildlife Fund, to all its 330,000 staff worldwide. A first of its kind among major global organisations, the programme aims to inform, challenge and inspire Deloitte employees to learn about the impacts of climate change and make responsible, sustainable choices at home, at work, and in giving client advice. 
37
[Page #37]
UNLOCKING THE FUTURE
Coupled with incentives, symbols and role modelling clear signals can be sent to the workforce about how the organisation chooses to operate; what behaviours and practices are valued and rewarded; and where employees have autonomy to create a wider impact.
Dedicated programmes and funding are being rolled out to improve retrofitting, provide local businesses with green grants and test approaches to inspire school leavers to take up green jobs.53
Level 3: Performing
Leaders wary of acting first
Private sector sustainability professionals interviewed said that being early adopters of environmental sustainability practices and innovations is difficult for leaders because of the degree of uncertainty caused by rapid technology advancement, evolving policies and legal/compliance obligations.  
To encourage investment into green skills, grants, tax incentives and subsidies were considered beneficial.  Especially government commitments to more green apprenticeships in key sectors, green skills funds that employees could tap into to reskill and investment in a green skills curriculum.
For example, BT Group plc told the Goal 13 Impact Platform that ten per cent of bonuses for eligible managers are linked to BT’s performance in carbon reduction and digital skills.54 
Some interviewees recognised that their organisations have entrenched views on what makes a good investment, based on historical good performance and limited reflection on the changing external context of a shift to a green economy.
Designing and realigning incentives will be vital in motivating a shift towards green skills uptake and recognising the value/benefits that these skills bring to the organisation.
Green skills are not embedded for the long term
Maintaining green skills and behaviours across the organisation is seen as a long-term challenge for  more mature organisations. Interviewees felt that one-off organisation-wide learning can deliver immediate awareness of sustainability but can be a ‘tick box’ exercise that is short-lived in its impact on employee skills.  
Some organisations reflected on how some past government incentives that signalled strong backing for sustainability initiatives were later scrapped, resulting in hesitancy by leaders to make commitments.
Example enabling initiatives: 
There is also a constant evolution in the nature of green skills required, resulting in the need for a concerted long-term effort to embed and sustain learning. 
Clear government incentives: Sustainability professionals called for clear policy and regulatory direction from government to encourage organisations to act. 
Example enabling initiatives:
Establishing a set of internal sustainability metrics or KPIs: A link between green skills and organisational performance can bring clarity and a common purpose for employees to get behind. At the organisational level, a focus on meeting and exceeding net zero objectives, science based targets, social value objectives or driving climate related financial disclosure can show long-term ambitions for sustainability.
Green innovation programmes: Establishing an incubation platform to accelerate green innovation and the development of complementary green skills. For example, the West of England Combined Authority are collaborating with residents, businesses, academic institutions and research organisations to drive innovation and enhance green skills as part of their Climate Emergency Plan.  
Understanding
Developing
Performing
Leading
38
[Page #38]
UNLOCKING THE FUTURE
Case study
Speedy Services embeds sustainability across job functions
“I think it’s really important when you’re rolling out an ESG strategy  that people have that education programme behind them to upskill. You cannot have a strong strategy without a strong education and training programme behind it.”
Speedy Services aims to disrupt traditional norms in the construction sector through a focus on innovative practices, technology and digitisation. It is working to include sustainability requirements in all job descriptions and its business-wide ESG programme rolled out in 2022. The company aims to ensure that employees have a good level of understanding of what ESG is and its impact on the company and the construction sector as a whole. A company representative said, “I think it’s really important when you’re rolling out an ESG strategy... that people have that education programme behind them to upskill. You cannot have a strong strategy without a strong education and training programme behind it.”
39
[Page #39]
UNLOCKING THE FUTURE
Level 4: Leading
Supply chain and partners maturity
Organisations’ supply chains are often long, and suppliers may not have made as much progress in developing their green skills and practices.
Organisations’ supply chains are often long and suppliers may not have made as much progress in developing their green skills and practices. This is a problem for large organisations, compromising their own sustainability performance. A Director of Procurement interviewed mentioned the lack of green practices at smaller supplier companies as a particular problem. 
Example enabling initiatives:
Upskilling suppliers: Leading organisations can take an active role by sharing the lessons they have learned and helping to upskill suppliers in order to drive progress towards a net zero supply chain. Dedicated supplier forums and recognised certification can help to show ambition and the extent of progress by suppliers. 
Procurement and contract management approaches: Supplier contracts might be used as enablers in two ways: first, by including environmental requirements in tender documents for the award of contracts; and second, by extending the length of contracts for standard items to longer terms, enabling buyers and suppliers to build relationships, share training across teams, and increase the focus on mutual benefits. 
Understanding
Developing
Performing
Leading
40
[Page #40]
UNLOCKING THE FUTURE
Case study
NHS decarbonising its supply chain
The NHS set itself the bold ambition to be the world’s first net zero national health service. As part of this overall goal, it set a net zero target for its supply chain.
The NHS set itself the bold ambition to be the world’s first ‘net zero’ national health service. As part of this overall goal, it set a net zero target for its supply chain. To meet the targets, the NHS Commercial Directorate developed a supplier engagement strategy and strategic programme.
A framework was developed to assess the sustainability maturity of suppliers, together with a net zero supplier roadmap. This framework enabled the NHS to set clear requirements with suppliers and give greater visibility of how supplies are meeting the net zero ambition. 
41
[Page #41]
UNLOCKING THE FUTURE
A lack of specialist talent
Example enabling initiatives: 
Some interviewees said that their organisation struggled to find specialist talent with technical green skills, such as carbon lifecycle analysis. These skills are increasingly in demand, and the shortage could result in missed commercial opportunities and lower long-term growth.
Develop specialist talent from within: Some interviewees from organisations with long-term skills gaps said that they were looking to grow specialist talent from within by investing in continuous professional development, secondments and targeted external training. It was hoped that this would avoid involvement in talent wars and provide a steady supply of skills.
We want to use apprenticeships and graduate schemes to attract people into the industry. We have training and  development opportunities within the organisation and have the right professional networks to help attract and retain talent in the industry.
Individuals with transferable skills in STEM subjects (science, technology, engineering and maths) are generally attracted to working in sectors that offer higher salaries, such as finance and technology. 
Partnerships between government and industry to target specialist talent development were seen as key. There was unanimous acknowledgement among interviewees that this would be a long-term strategic solution, rather than something to alleviate current skills and talent gaps. 
Organisations that need specialist advice are turning to external advisors and consultants to fill gaps. Sustainability leaders who attended the roundtables commented that some decarbonisation advisors are overwhelmed with work and may not always have the capacity to meet the demand for expertise. 
School outreach programmes and careers fairs that encourage green skills from a young age were also seen as options, which some organisations were already taking, especially in engineering.
Lynne Malpass, Head of Environment and Industrial Risk at SUEZ
42
[Page #42]
UNLOCKING THE FUTURE
Case study
National Grid builds workforce infrastructure through outreach programmes
National Grid hopes that by educating children around key infrastructure projects, the next generation will be inspired to join the net zero energy workforce.
National Grid noticed that the energy sector was struggling to recruit and retain top talent. A proportion of its workforce was reaching retirement age, only a limited number of students were choosing STEM qualifications, which other sectors were competing for, and there was also a lack of diversity in the talent pool. National Grid therefore decided that was essential to inspire the next generation to join their net zero energy workforce.
In addition, employees visit local schools to educate students on energy projects in their area and on various career routes into the sector, including apprenticeships. They also provide grants for STEM equipment, allowing over 250,000 school children to learn about STEM-related activities. In Northumberland, which will be a landing point for the North Sea Link interconnector, it opened an Energy Education Centre. The free community space has education initiatives on climate change and changing energy usage behaviour. National Grid hopes that by educating children around key infrastructure projects, the next generation will be inspired to join the net zero energy workforce.
One of its programmes works in partnership with the Prince’s Trust. It aims to support 5,000 people from disadvantaged communities over the next five years to gain employment in a net zero-related industry.
43
[Page #43]
Unlocking the future:
regional and national initiatives
44
[Page #44]
UNLOCKING THE FUTURE: REGIONAL AND NATIONAL INITIATIVES
Action by individual organisations is critical. However, a number of regional and national UK government initiatives, some already underway, will be needed to contribute to the green workforce transformation.   
Regional enablers
Regional education providers 
Interviewees suggested that educational establishments might tailor courses based on local natural resources, as well as government commitments for the area. For example, the University of Aberdeen leverages its location in an energy hub to offer courses that include MSc programmes in Energy Transition Systems and Technologies, and in Renewable Energy Engineering. 
Our interviewees also suggested that partnerships between education providers and local industry could inform workforce planning at the local level. While government commitment and signalling play a huge role in decisions about which courses education providers should offer, student bodies and staff enthusiasm can accelerate change in the higher educational programmes. 
“Climate literacy is improving all the time. The graduate students I work with have an implicit understanding of environmental sustainability.”IEMA stakeholder survey respondent
45
[Page #45]
UNLOCKING THE FUTURE: REGIONAL AND NATIONAL INITIATIVES
Case study
EKC Group instills green skills for the future generation
“We are making real progress in reducing our carbon footprint and, most importantly, incorporating green skills into our education provision to assist our students to enter jobs that improve our environment.”
The EKC Group, an alliance of colleges in East Kent, aims to be the leader among Further Education providers in delivering education sustainably and equipping students with green skills and resources for their lives and careers. 
EKC’s CEO, Graham Razey OBE, said that students’ passion was a driver for the group’s efforts: “Responding to the significant voice of our student body, EKC Group has permanently changed its way of thinking. We are making real progress in reducing our carbon footprint and, most importantly, incorporating green skills into our education provision to assist our students to enter jobs that improve our environment.”
46
[Page #46]
UNLOCKING THE FUTURE: REGIONAL AND NATIONAL INITIATIVES
Greater Manchester Combined Authority is preparing its workforce to become retrofitters. A study by the Green Finance Institute and Bankers for Net Zero found that the UK retrofitting sector will need to grow by a factor of at least ten to deliver the required levels of retrofits for the UK to achieve its net zero target by 2050.58 The Greater Manchester Conduct Authority is partnering with local educators to help fill this gap.
Local councils and combined authorities
Interviewees welcomed local council plans and priorities. Some councils and combined authorities have declared climate emergencies and are outlining their priority areas to drive change. Climate Change UK has tracked 334 councils that have declared climate emergencies, of which 290 have climate action plans.55 These plans allow organisations to identify areas in which retraining and upskilling are necessary, and help them to consider how this training might be delivered. 
The Greater London Authority’s Adult Education Budget also provides funding for green skills training. In the 2019/20 academic year, about 19 per cent of students were enrolled on green-related courses, of which one-quarter focused specifically on the green sector.59   
In the 2019/20 academic year, about 19 per cent of students were enrolled on green-related courses, of which one-quarter focused specifically on the green sector.59  
For example, the West of England Combined Authority (WECA)’s Climate Emergency Action Plan has a target of achieving carbon neutrality by 2030. It has identified five challenge areas it wants to address with national and local government, local businesses, and its residents: low carbon transport, low carbon business, renewable energy, low carbon buildings and places, and the green environment. In its Action Plan, WECA has outlined a set of steps it will take to support local people to develop skills and access green jobs.53
Devolved administrations 
An enabler frequently mentioned by interviewees was the effort by devolved administrations to direct individuals towards green training and career opportunities. For example, the Green Jobs Workforce Academy, developed for the Scottish Government by Skills Development Scotland (SDS),60 aims to provide avenues to training and jobs for Scottish residents, to contribute to its goal of reaching net zero by 2045.60 Its website, greenjobs.scot, provides information on career prospects, pathways to entry, and available courses in five sectors: transport; industry; construction and the built environment; engineering; and agriculture and land use. It also has a search function for looking for available job roles and training courses.61
These commitments, action plans and charters provide regionally tailored routes to achieving greener communities. For example, Southampton’s Greener City Plan identifies staff training in the circular economy and waste reduction as a key action for the city and its businesses.56 And Northumberland’s Climate Change Action Plan expects jobs to be created in carbon sequestration (e.g. data analysis and mapping of the natural capital in the region and ecological managers).57 
47
[Page #47]
UNLOCKING THE FUTURE: REGIONAL AND NATIONAL INITIATIVES
National enablers
Provision for lifelong learning 
80% of individuals who will be in the UK’s workforce in 2030 are already in work today. This points to the need for urgent action to upskill the current workforce to acquire green skills. And as green skills evolve and become more specialised, national provision of continuous professional development will be vital for topping up knowledge.   
Education frameworks
At the UK level, putting the right education frameworks in place is considered by our interviewees   to be essential for driving the green skills and jobs agenda. 20 per cent of respondents to IEMA’s stakeholder survey viewed secondary education as the most important enabler for the green skills agenda over the next five to ten years. 
The National Skills Fund aims to invest £2.5 billion in adult education and training by providing adults aged 19 and over with access to fully funded Level 3 courses (equivalent to an advanced technical certificate or diploma, or A level).64 Green skills in the form of an environmental conservation course have been included alongside traditional courses such as digital, engineering, health and construction. These courses have been specifically selected to help adults improve their job prospects, as they have good wage outcomes and can provide skills that are needed in the economy. 
The Department for Education’s draft strategy for sustainability recommends changes to the national curriculum, including earlier teaching and greater integration of sustainability, as well as the introduction of an Environmental Science A Level.62 
Careers advice
Better and earlier careers advice about green skills and jobs was also called for. However, some interviewees suggested that the language used to describe green jobs should be changed, to ensure skills and jobs have more appeal. 
Government influence
Beyond policy initiatives like the Apprenticeship Levy and the National Skills Fund, there are other legislative requirements that sustainability leaders we interviewed recognise as enablers of the shift towards a greener society and economy. They include the UK’s 2050 net zero emissions target and the Environment Act that received the Royal Assent in November 2021. The net zero target places an onus on all sectors of the economy to decarbonise, while the Environment Act specifies long-term targets in the areas of air quality, biodiversity, water, resource efficiency and waste reduction. 
Apprenticeships
Apprenticeships were also mentioned as another way in which organisations from different sectors can recruit and develop staff with a focus on green skills. Existing policy initiatives include the Apprenticeship Levy63 which requires organisations with an annual wage bill of more than £3million per year to put 0.5% of this amount towards funding apprenticeships. 
The Green Apprenticeships Advisory Panel (GAAP)63 is working on identifying how apprenticeships can be made ‘greener’. 
48
[Page #48]
UNLOCKING THE FUTURE: REGIONAL AND NATIONAL INITIATIVES
The transition to the green economy is driving a fundamental change in how organisations will operate in the future. Some organisations are already taking steps to enhance and extend green skills across their organisation, although few are taking a holistic strategic approach to this. 
Attendees at our roundtable for the public sector hoped these policies would be helpful, but many interviewees from the private sector suggested that additional support and central government signposting is necessary. One interviewee in financial services said, “There seems to be a reliance by government to let markets sort it out themselves without necessarily providing pricing or signals for that to happen. We’re not on target to hit our decarbonisation targets. For example, agriculture desperately needs to decarbonise, but I’ve seen zero progress or government intervention to make it happen.”
A green workforce transformation faces a number of blockers, but proven enablers are already emerging. If you are thinking about embarking on this journey or improving your approach, we encourage you to look at our accompanying toolkit to consider the maturity of the green skills of your organisation, your team or you personally.
Strong government signposting is seen as a key enabler for change. One such enabler is the government response to the Environmental Audit Committee’s (EAC) report on Green Jobs. Key elements of the response include:
•  commitment to capture data to track growth 
of green jobs.
•  reaffirmation of the Net Zero Strategy’s commitment 
to establish a cross-department Green Jobs Delivery Group.
•  commitment to reform the skills system, including housing retrofit, through existing programmes and the development of new training offers.
49
[Page #49]
Endnotes
50
[Page #50]
ENDNOTES
 Futures We Want, Futures We Want Reports, https://www.futureswewant.world/, Accessed on March 2022.
1. 
 Karin Kimbrough, These are the sectors where green jobs are growing in demand, Word Economic Forum, https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2021/09/sectors-where-green-jobs-are-growing-in-demand/, Accessed on March 2022.
15.  Deloitte, Voices From The Market: Goal 13 Impact Platform, https://www2.deloitte.com/uk/en/focus/climate-change/goal-13-report.html, Accessed in March 2022.
8. 
25.  London Authority, Identifying Green Occupations 
in London, https://www.london.gov.uk/business-and-economy-publications/identifying-green-occupations-london?utm_campaign=Identifying%20Green%20Occupations%20in%20London&utm_source=emailCampaign&utm_content=&utm_medium=email, Accessed on March 2022.
 Karin Kimbrough, These are the sectors where green jobs are growing in demand, Word Economic Forum, https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2021/09/sectors-where-green-jobs-are-growing-in-demand/, Accessed on March 2022.
2. 
16.  Deloitte and IEMA analysis.
9. 
 Deloitte analysis of ONS Labour Force Survey, Office for National Statistics, Employment in the UK: November 2021, https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/employmentandemployeetypes/bulletins/employmentintheuk/november2021, Accessed on March 2022.
17.  Deloitte, Voices From The Market: Goal 13 Impact Platform, https://www2.deloitte.com/uk/en/focus/climate-change/goal-13-report.html, Accessed in March 2022.
26.  G. C. Kane, D. Palmer, A. N. Phillips, D. Kiron, and N. Buckley, Achieving Digital Maturity, MIT Sloan Management Review and Deloitte University Press, July 2017, https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/insights/us/articles/3678_achieving-digital-maturity/DUP_Achieving-digital-maturity.pdf, Accessed on March 2022.
 Deloitte, The future of the Chief Sustainability Officer: Sense-maker in chief, https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/global/Documents/Financial-Services/gx-fsi-future-of-the-cso-report.pdf, Published in February 2021.
3. 
18.  Deloitte analysis of data from LinkedIn 
Talent Insights.
10.  Analysis of data from LinkedIn Talent Insights.
19.  Primary insights collected from IEMA stakeholder 
 HM Government, The Ten Point Plan for a Green Industrial Revolution, https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/936567/10_POINT_PLAN_BOOKLET.pdf, Published in November 2020.
4. 
11.  Primary insights collected from IEMA stakeholder 
survey: Q10.
27.  Deloitte and GeSI, Digital with Purpose: Delivering a SMARTer 2030, https://gesi.org/research/gesi-digital-with-purpose-full-report, Accessed on March 2022.
survey: Q10.
20.  GreenBiz Group, State of the Profession, https://www.greenbiz.com/report/state-profession-2020-report, Accessed on March 2022.
12.  Legagneux, P. et al. (2018) Our House Is Burning: Discrepancy in Climate Change vs. Biodiversity Coverage in the Media as Compared to Scientific Literature, Front. Ecol. Evol. 5:175. doi: 10.3389/fevo.2017.00175.
28.  World Economic Forum, Bridging Digital and 
 International Panel on Climate Change, Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change, https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg3/, Accessed on March 2022.
5. 
21.  FT, The rise of the Chief Sustainability Officer,  
Environmental Goals: A framework for business action, https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Bridging_Digital_and_Environmental_Goals_2021.pdf, Published in March 2021.
https://channels.ft.com/en/ft-moral-money/the-rise-of-the-cso/, Accessed on March 2022.
13.  International Panel on Climate Change, Climate 
Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press. In Press.
22.  Deloitte, The future of the Chief Sustainability Officer: 
 HM Government, Green Jobs Taskforce report, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/green-jobs-taskforce-report, Published in July 2021
6. 
Sense-maker in chief, https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/global/Documents/Financial-Services/gx-fsi-future-of-the-cso-report.pdf, February 2021, Published in February 2021
29.  BT, The Future in 2021, Emerging technologies: 
paving the way to a brighter business future, https://business.bt.com/content/dam/bt/business/v2/PDF/the-future-is-now/BT_TFI2021_Report.pdf, Accessed on March 2022.
7. 
 House of Commons Environmental Audit Committee, Green Jobs: Third Report of Session 2021–22, https://committees.parliament.uk/publications/7615/documents/79773/default/, Published in October 2021.
14.  IEMA research; oral evidence given by 
23.  Primary insights collected from IEMA stakeholder 
Institution of Engineering and Technology to the Environmental Audit Committee on Green Jobs and the Just Transition (Published in February 2021). 
survey: Q15.
30.  Dr Gemma Burgess, Tackle the digital 
divide, https://www.cam.ac.uk/stories/BeyondThePandemic_digitaldivide, Accessed on March 2022.
24.  Primary insights collected from IEMA stakeholder 
survey: Q9.
51
[Page #51]
ENDNOTES
31.  World Skills UK, Disconnected? Exploring the digital skills gap, https://www.worldskillsuk.org/news/new-research-highlights-uk-digital-skills-gap/, Accessed on March 2022.
38.  HM Government, British energy security strategy, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/british-energy-security-strategy/british-energy-security-strategy, Accessed on April 2022.
45.  The Faraday Institution, UK Electric Vehicle and Battery Production Potential to 2040, https://faraday.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/Exec-Summary-Report_May2019_FINAL.pdf, Published in March 2019.
50.  Jillian Ambrose, Gone with the wind: why UK firms 
could miss out on the offshore boom, The Guardian, https://www.theguardian.com/business/2021/sep/04/gone-with-the-wind-why-uk-firms-could-miss-out-on-the-offshore-boom, Accessed on March 2022.
32.  Charles Wookey, What do people want from work? https://www.cbi.org.uk/articles/what-do-people-want-from-work/, Accessed on March 2022.
39.  HM Government, Net Zero Strategy: Build Back 
Greener, www.gov.uk/government/publications/net-zero-strategy, Published in October 2021.
46.  HM Government, The Ten Point Plan for a Green Industrial Revolution, https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/936567/10_POINT_PLAN_BOOKLET.pdf, Published in November 2020.
51.  Deloitte, Mission-based teams. Reconstructing 
businesses as an evolving network of teams and outcomes, https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/uk/Documents/strategy/deloitte-uk-mission-based-teams-reconstructing-businesses-as-an-evolving-network-of-teams-and-outcomes.pdf, Published in July 2020.
33.  Deloitte, The worker-employer relationship disrupted, 
40.  Platform for Electronic Mobility and Boston 
Consulting Group, E-mobility: A green boost for European automotive jobs?, https://www.platformelectromobility.eu/2021/09/24/our-key-findings-and-recommendations-to-make-the-european-green-deal-an-employment-success/, Accessed on March 2022.
https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/focus/human-capital-trends/2021/the-evolving-employer-employee-relationship.html, Accessed on March 2022.
47.  HM Government, UK Hydrogen Strategy, https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/1011283/UK-Hydrogen-Strategy_web.pdf, Published in August 2021.
52.  Gemma Robertson-Smith and Carl Markwick, 
34.  OGUK, OGUK Workforce & Employment Insight 
Employee Engagement: A review of current thinking, Institute for Employment Studies, https://www.employment-studies.co.uk/system/files/resources/files/469.pdf, Accessed on March 2022.
Report 2021, https://oguk.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/woocommerce_uploads/2021/08/OGUK_Workforce-Employment-Insight-2021-z07os0.pdf, Accessed on March 2022.
41.  Deloitte, New market. New entrants. New challenges. Battery Electric Vehicles, https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/uk/Documents/manufacturing/deloitte-uk-battery-electric-vehicles.pdf, Accessed on March 2022.
48.  HM Government, Net Zero Strategy: Build Back 
Greener, www.gov.uk/government/publications/net-zero-strategy, Published in October 2021.
53.  WECA and West of England Local Enterprise 
35.  OGUK, Economic Report 2021, https://oguk.org.
Partnership, West of England Climate Emergency Action Plan, https://westofengland-ca.moderngov.co.uk/documents/s2200/CE%20Action%20Plan.pdf, Published in September 2020.
49.  Just Transition Commission Scotland, 
uk/the-uk-faces-a-stark-energy-choice-invest-in-its-offshore-industry-to-build-energy-security-jobs-and-a-managed-green-transition-or-rely-on-other-countries-for-its-energy-needs-a-report-h/, Accessed on March 2022.
42.  The Economist, Servicing and repairing electric cars requires new skills, https://www.economist.com/science-and-technology/servicing-and-repairing-electric-cars-requires-new-skills/21805752, Accessed on March 2022.
Advising on a net zero economy that is fair for all: Industry information gathering session, https://www.gov.scot/binaries/content/documents/govscot/publications/minutes/2019/10/just-transition-commission-meeting-papers-september-2019/documents/paper-4-2-industry-session-background/paper-4-2-industry-session-background/govscot%3Adocument/Paper%2B4.2%2B-%2BIndustry%2Bsession%2Bbackground.pdf, Accessed on March 2022.
54.  Deloitte, Voices From The Market: Goal 13 Impact Platform, https://www2.deloitte.com/uk/en/focus/climate-change/goal-13-report.html, Accessed on March 2022.
36.  HM Government, British energy security strategy, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/british-energy-security-strategy/british-energy-security-strategy, Accessed on April 2022.
43.  Deloitte analysis of ONS labour force data.
44.  Transport & Environment, UK auto industry left 
55.  Climate Emergency UK, Climate Action Plan 
behind as carmakers focus EV production in EU countries, https://www.transportenvironment.org/discover/uk-auto-industry-left-behind-as-carmakers-focus-ev-production-in-eu-countries/, Accessed on March 2022.
Explorer, https://data.climateemergency.uk/councils/, Accessed on March 2022.
37.  HM Government, Oil and Gas Workforce Plan, https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/535039/bis-16-266-oil-and-gas-workforce-plan.pdf, Published in July 2016.
52
[Page #52]
ENDNOTES
56.  Southampton City Council, Southampton City 
61.  Department for Education, Sustainability & 
Council Green City Plan 2030: To create a cleaner, greener, healthier and more sustainable city, https://www.southampton.gov.uk/media/3r0jtsra/green-city-strategy_tcm63-424943.pdf, Published in March 2020.
Climate Change: A draft strategy for the education & children’s services systems, https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/1031454/SCC_DRAFT_Strategy.pdf, Published in November 2021.
57.  Northumberland County Council, 
Climate Change Action Plan: 2021-23, https://www.northumberland.gov.uk/NorthumberlandCountyCouncil/media/About-the-Council/Climate%20change/Climate-change-action-plan-2021-23.pdf, Accessed on March 2022.
62.  Department for Education, Key facts you should 
know about the apprenticeship levy, https://www.gov.uk/government/news/key-facts-you-should-know-about-the-apprenticeship-levy, Accessed on March 2022.
58.  Green Finance Institute and Bankers for Net Zero, Tooling up the Green Homes Industry: Financing the Retrofit Supply Chain, https://volans.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/Tooling-up-the-Green-Homes-Industry_FINAL.pdf, Accessed on March 2022.
63.  Institute for Apprenticeships & Technical 
Education, Green Apprenticeship Advisory Panel, https://www.instituteforapprenticeships.org/about/how-we-do-it/green-apprenticeship-advisory-panel/, Accessed on March 2022.
64.  Department for Education, National Skills Fund, https://www.gov.uk/guidance/national-skills-fund, Accessed on March 2022.
59.  Greater London Authority, Green Skills Adult 
Education Provision in London https://data.london.gov.uk/dataset/green-skills-adult-education-provision-in-london, Accessed on March 2022.
60.  Skills Development Scotland, Green Jobs Workforce Academy offers a new route to a sustainable career, https://www.skillsdevelopmentscotland.co.uk/news-events/2021/august/green-jobs-workforce-academy-offers-a-new-route-to-a-sustainable-career/, Accessed on March 2022.
53
[Page #53]
CONTACTS
Key contacts
Matthew GuestPartnerConsultingmguest@deloitte.co.uk
Daniel GrosvenorPartner Financial Advisorydgrosvenor@deloitte.co.uk
Sarah MukherjeeCEO IEMAs.mukherjee@iema.net
Authors
Laila TakehDirector Net Zero Transformationltakeh@deloitte.co.uk
Vesselina NaskinovaSenior Consultant Net Zero Transformationvnaskinova@deloitte.co.uk
54
[Page #54]
This publication has been written in general terms and we recommend that you obtain professional advice before acting or refraining from action on any of the contents of this publication. Deloitte MCS Limited accepts no liability for any loss occasioned to any person acting or refraining from action as a result of any material in this publication. 
Monitor Deloitte refers to Deloitte MCS Limited which is registered in England and Wales with number 03311052 and its registered office at Hill House, 1 Little New Street, London, EC4A 3TR, United Kingdom.  
Deloitte MCS Limited is a subsidiary of Deloitte LLP, which is the United Kingdom affiliate of Deloitte NSE LLP, a member firm of Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited, a UK private company limited by guarantee (“DTTL”). DTTL and each of its member firms are legally separate and independent entities. DTTL and Deloitte NSE LLP do not provide services to clients. Please see www.deloitte.com/about to learn more about our global network of member firms. 
© 2022 Monitor Company Europe. All rights reserved.
Designed by 368. J21873
55
